A GUIDE
TO THE

SUN-EARTH SYSTEM

THE SUN, THE EARTH,
AND NEAR-EARTH SPACE
A Guide to the Sun-Earth System

JOHN A. EDDY

JOHN A. EDDY

www.nasa.gov

For Barbara

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office
Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC area (202) 512-1800
Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail Stop: IDCC, Washington, DC 20402-0001
ISBN 978-0-16-08308-8
This book was made possible by NASA Living With a Star grant number
NNG06EC631
The graphic image of the Sun on the cover and in the text is a detail from a much larger
woodcut created by Albrecht Dürer (1471-1528) to illustrate the prophecies of the
Apocalypse in an early book printed in Germany in 1498.
NP-2009-1-066-GSFC

Dear Reader,
The enclosed work represents a loving and dedicated effort on the part of my
beloved late husband, John A. Eddy, known to most of us as Jack. With the
exception of a few minor administrative details, the book was only just completed,
and the final, final version signed off on, when our three-year battle with cancer
took him from us on June 10th 2009. And although Jack, sadly, did not get
to see the final printed version, all of the words, illustrations, tables, graphs,
covers, even the most minor details, were carefully and thoughtfully conceived,
written, and edited by him over a multi-year period in our peaceful home office
in Tucson, Arizona.
It was Jack’s hope and goal to assemble in one place, through this book, concise
explanations and descriptions—easily read and readily understood—of what we
now know of the chain of events and processes that connect the Sun to the Earth,
with especial emphasis on space weather and Sun-Climate. As many know, Jack
was extraordinarily gifted at teaching and illustrating and popularizing any
subject, but particularly those in the realm of science. I believe he once again
shared these gifts with us through his many years of work on this book.
For those of us who were blessed to know Jack, we will surely always remember
his kind, gentle, soft-spoken and dignified nature as well as his magical sense of
humor. And all will sense these traits within the thoughts and words that he has
given us through this book. I am deeply proud and honored to have been his
indirect and unspoken partner in this endeavor, as well as his wife, soul-mate,
and life partner for nearly twenty years.
Barbara
Mrs. John A. Eddy
Tucson, Arizona
July 4th 2009

The Sun-Earth System: CONTENTS
AN
OVERVIEW
							

The Stars Around Us		
					
Our Dependence on the Sun
				
The Sun’s Inconstancy							
Intruders from Afar							
What Gets By					
			
Voyages of Discovery in an Age of Exploration
		
A New Appreciation							
The Consequences							
An Interconnected System						

1
3
3
5
5
6
7
8
9

THE SUN
The Sun as a Star							
A Voyage to the Sun							
Perpetual Combustion							
The Hidden Source of Solar Energy			
		
Delayed Delivery							
Radiant Energy from the Sun 						
How Constant Is and Was the Sun?		
Metered Sunshine							
The First Who Saw the Face of the Sun				
The Long Watch							
The Sun That We Can See						
The Photosphere 							
Sunspots								
Bright Faculae								
Beneath the Shining Surface: The Bubble Machine			
Lifting the Veil: The Unseen Sun					
The Sun’s Chromosphere and Corona					
How We See the Corona and Chromosphere				

13
13
14
16
16
17
18
19
20
23
24
24
26
28
30
31
34
38

THE SOLAR WIND & SOLAR VARIABILITY
The Solar Wind							
Sources and Characteristics of the Solar Wind				
Solar Variability					
		
Why the Sun Varies			
		
Short- and Long-Term Changes in Solar Activity
		
Solar Explosions and Eruptions					
Explosive Solar Flares							

45
47
50
52
56
57
57

Solar Prominences and Filaments					
Coronal Mass Ejections						

60
64

THE NEAR-EARTH ENVIRONMENT
A Protected Planet							
The Air Above Us							
Changes on the Way to the Top 					
The Troposphere							
The Stratosphere							
The Mesosphere and Thermosphere					
The Ionized Upper Atmosphere					
The End of the Atmosphere						
Into the Magnetosphere 						
The Form and Function of the Magnetosphere				
The Paths that Particles Follow						
Captive Particles in the Magnetosphere				
The Earth’s Radiation Belts						
The Plasmasphere							
The Heliosphere							
Cruising the Heliosphere						

71
72
72
75
76
77
79
81
82
84
85
86
88
91
92
94

FLUCTUATIONS IN SOLAR RADIATION AT THE EARTH
Changes in Total Solar Irradiance 					
Variability in Different Parts of the Spectrum				
Effects of the Sun’s Rotation						
Effects of the Earth’s Orbit						
Lost in Transit: The Fate of Solar Radiation in the Earth’s
Atmosphere 							

99
102
104
105
107

VARIATION IN THE FLOW OF PARTICLES AT
THE EARTH
The Nature of Arriving Particles			
		
Solar Sources 								
Particles Borne Outward in CMEs
				
Particles from Solar Flare						
The Solar Wind Plasma				
		
Characteristics of Slow Solar Wind Streams
		
High-Speed Solar Wind Streams					
Sectors in the Sun’s Extended Magnetic Field				
Pushing and Shoving on the Way to the Earth 			
When Solar Particles Strike the Earth		
			

111
113
113
115
117
118
118
119
121
122

Through the Guarded Gates						
Magnetic Reconnection						
Effects of Changes in the Earth’s Magnetic Field
		
Cosmic Rays								
The Fate of Cosmic Rays				
		

124
126
129
131
132

IMPACTS OF SOLAR VARIABILITY
Solar Causes, Terrestrial Impacts, and Societal Effects			
Impacts on Near-Earth Space						
Magnetic Storms					
		
The Aurora					
			
Impacts on the Upper Atmosphere			
		
Perturbing the Earth’s Electric Field					
Restructuring the Ionosphere			
			
Disturbing the Biosphere: The Lower Atmosphere, Oceans,
and Land Surface							

139
141
143
146
153
155
156
159

EFFECTS ON HUMAN LIFE AND ENDEAVOR
What is Affected							
Some Specific Societal Effects						
Exposure of Aircraft Passengers and Crews				
Risks to Manned Space Flight						
The Ocean of Air							
Enhanced Ultraviolet And X-Ray Radiation				
Solar X-rays								
A Sun Intensely Bright							
Solar Energetic Particles and Cosmic Rays				
The Physiological Effects of Ionizing Radiation			
The Importance of Dosage						
The Disaster That Almost Happened					
Impacts on Spacecraft, Space Equipment and on Observations
of the Earth From Space						
Times of Particular Hazard						
Flight Paths of Greatest Risk						
Spacecraft at the Lagrangian Points of the Sun-Earth System		
Polar Orbits and the South Atlantic Anomaly				
Geosynchronous and Geostationary Orbits				
Destructive Particles From the Sun and the Earth’s
Radiation Belts							
Cosmic Rays								
Atmospheric Drag							
Impacts on Micro-Circuits and Computer Systems			
Damage to Other Space Equipment					

165
165
167
171
171
172
172
172
173
176
176
178
182
184
184
185
186
186
187
188
189
191
192

Protecting Against Damage From High-Energy Particles		
Impacts on Telecommunications, GPS, and Navigation		
Direct and Indirect Reception of Radio Waves				
Role of the Sun and Solar Variations					
Impacts on GPS and Other Navigation Systems			
Effects on Electric Power Transmission					
The Power Blackout of 1989						
How Magnetic Storms Disrupt Power Systems				
Where Solar-Driven Power Outages Most Often Occur		
Effects of Geomagnetically-induced Currents on the
Cost of Electricity							
Early Signs of Solar Interference in Communications			
Effects of GICS on Telecommunications Cables			
Damage to Pipelines							
Impacts of Geomagnetic Storms on Geological Surveys
and Explorations							

193
195
196
197
198
199
200
201
201
203
203
204
205
205

EFFECTS OF THE SUN ON WEATHER AND CLIMATE
A Brief History								
The Missing Pieces							
Metering the Energy the Earth Receives				
Recovering the Past History of the Sun					
Effects of Solar Spectral Radiation					
Sensitivity of Climate to Solar Fluctuations				
11-year Solar Forcing							
Solar Forcing of the Oceans						
Hidden Diaries of the Ancient Sun					
The Fate of Carbon-14							
Beryllium-10 in Ice Cores						
Marks of the Sun on North Atlantic Climate During
the Last 11,000 Years						

209
212
213
217
219
221
223
224
225
227
228
230

FORECASTING SPACE WEATHER AT THE EARTH
AND BEYOND
Space Weather								
Predictions								
Sources of Needed Data						
Available Warning Times						
Especial Needs for Manned Space Exploration				
Current Capabilities							
Operational Facilities							
The Heliophysics System Observatory					

235
236
238
240
242
245
246
249

REFLECTIONS
Solar Misbehavior							
What Has Changed?							
The Sun and Global Warming						

255
256
258

ACKNOWLEDGMENT						

261

APPENDICES
Glossary of Technical Terms						
Sources for Additional Information					
Tables									
Images and Illustrations						
Index									

263
291
295
297
301

The Great Andromeda Nebula, a vast collection of stars some 2 million light years away. Although each of the stars in the central
core and spiral arms of that faraway galaxy is much like our own star, the Sun, we see most of them blurred together by great
distance, and through a speckled foreground of countless other, much nearer stars which belong to own spiral-shaped galaxy, the
Milky Way.

AN OVERVIEW
The Stars Around Us

I

n a world of warmth and light and living things we soon forget that we are
surrounded by a vast universe that is cold and dark and deadly dangerous,
just beyond our door. On a starry night, when we look out into the darkness
that lies around us, the view can be misleading in yet another way: for the
brightness and sheer number of stars, and their chance groupings into familiar
constellations, make them seem much nearer to each other, and to us, than in
truth they are. And every one of them— each twinkling, like a diamond in the
sky—is a white-hot sun, much like our own.
The nearest stars in our own galaxy—the Milky Way—are more than a million
times farther away from us than our star, the Sun. We could make a telephone
call to the Moon and expect to wait but a few seconds between pieces of a
conversation, or but a few hours in calling any planet in our solar system.
But one placed to the nearest star would impose a mandatory wait of almost
nine years between a question asked and the answer received. And though the
radio waves that carry our phone messages travel at the unimaginable speed
of 670 million miles per hour, calls placed to the celestial area codes of most
of the other stars in the sky would exact truly big-time roaming charges, with
conversational exchanges separated by unavoidable pauses of hundreds to
thousands to millions of years.
Yet these vast and lonely reaches of interstellar space are neither vacant nor
ever still. There are about 30 atoms—mostly hydrogen and helium—in each
cubic foot of interstellar (or interplanetary) space, and many more than this in
the vicinity of the Sun and the planets. In addition, there are also occasional
molecules and dust grains. Moreover, were we to look closely at any sampled
volume, however small and wherever it is, we would find it heavily trafficked:
continually crossed and criss-crossed by high-speed, atomic particles from the
Sun or the cosmos that are ever passing through.
Many of these itinerant transients are the accelerated protons and electrons and
atomic nuclei that are flung outward continually into space from the overheated
atmospheres of our own Sun and countless other stars: the omnipresent effluent
Technical or semi-technical words introduced in the text are printed in blue generally where they first
appear in the text. They are then defined in alphabetical order in the Glossary, starting on page 263.
1
Back to Table of Contents

2

of solar and stellar winds. Others—the so-called cosmic rays, which are often
more energetic and hence more lethal—are atomic particles of the same kinds
that were expelled much more forcefully from catastrophic stellar and galactic
explosions of long ago and far away.

Our Dependence on the Sun

T

he Earth, warmed and illumined by a benign and nearby star—and insulated
and protected from a surrounding environment that is entirely hostile to life—
remains a most unusual island in the middle of a dark and stormy sea.
Life itself is possible only because of the Sun and our nearness to this strong and
unfailing source of light and heat and energy. From it, and for free, we receive
in endless supply not only light and heat, but a steady stream of countless other
gifts and essentials. Among them are the blue of the sky, the clouds, rain and
snow, trees and flowers and tumbling streams, the replenishment of the oxygen
we breathe, and all of the food we eat.
The Sun is the source of all the energy that human beings have ever used in
burning wood, and in burning coal, oil, gasoline and natural gas: for these
fossil fuels are but repositories of solar energy from ages past, captured through
photosynthesis in the leaves of plants from long ago. All the energy we derive
from wind and water power comes also from the Sun. For it is heat from
the Sun that drives the winds, and heat from the Sun that keeps the rivers
flowing by evaporating surface water from the seas, to fall again as rain on
inland watersheds.
Can there be any wonder that the Sun was so widely revered and sanctified by
early peoples everywhere? Or that hymns still sung in churches today so often
draw on solar similes?
Break forth o beauteous heavenly Light, and usher in the morning
Come, quickly come, and let Thy glory shine, gilding our
darksome heaven with rays divine

The Sun’s Inconstancy

Yet the Sun is neither constant nor entirely beneficent. As a variable, magnetic

star, the Sun is ever changing and in many ways: most often through violent
explosions and eruptions of colossal scale. The glowing, gaseous surface that
appears so perfectly white and still from far away is in reality a roaring, roiling
arena of continual conflict and eruption.
3
Back to Table of Contents

Even the sunbeams that stream outward in such bounty are not entirely
benign: for with them come solar gamma rays, x-rays, ultraviolet radiation, and
highly energetic atomic particles, all of which are potentially lethal for living
things. Were it not for shielding by ozone, atomic oxygen and nitrogen in the
upper atmosphere—and the armor of the arching lines of force of the Earth’s
magnetic field—damaging short-wave radiation and atomic particles from the
Sun would have long ago extinguished life on Earth. Sunlight allowed life to
take hold on the planet, but it is these invisible shields, high above our heads,
that have permitted it to continue and evolve.
Most of the Sun’s short-wave radiation is kept from reaching the surface of the
Earth and the oceans: absorbed by atoms and molecules of air as it streams
downward through the atmosphere. The absorbers of gamma rays and x-rays
and far ultraviolet radiation are chiefly atoms and molecules of oxygen and
nitrogen that populate the thin and highly rarefied air in the upper atmosphere,
as far as 100 miles above the surface.
But the bulk of the Sun’s damaging ultraviolet radiation gets through these first
lines of defense and penetrates further, until with as little as five miles to go
before it reaches the surface, it is finally stopped. There in the stratosphere and
upper troposphere, it is largely absorbed and blocked by molecules of ozone:
a trace gas present in so meager a supply that were all of it compressed to the
density of ordinary air at the surface of the Earth it would be much thinner
than a window pane.
The recurring streams of atomic particles that flow continually outward
in heated winds from the Sun—or in violent bursts when parts of the Sun
erupt and explode—are blocked by other means. Incoming atomic particles,
regardless of their electrical charge, are fast depleted in number by repeated
collisions with atoms and molecules in the air, from the moment they enter the
Earth’s atmosphere.
Most of those that carry a + or – electric charge—including protons and
electrons and ions of helium and lithium and boron and almost all the other
elements—are repelled or captured before they can enter the upper atmosphere
of the Earth. In this case the shielding—which is most protective at lower
latitudes—is provided by the arched lines of magnetic force that tower high
above the surface of the planet, and all around it, providing a wrap-around
magnetic bumper, rooted in the planet’s internal magnetic field. Undeterred
by this magnetic barrier are high-energy galactic cosmic rays, whose energies
per particle are so great that they pass right through it and on down into the
upper atmosphere.
4

Intruders From Afar

I

nterstellar particles from a host of other, more distant stars also thread the solar
system, as do the considerably more energetic particles that arrive as cosmic rays
from unseen stellar and galactic explosions elsewhere in the universe. Charged
galactic cosmic rays of sufficient energy per particle can overpower the defenses
of our own magnetosphere to spend their prodigious energies in collisions with
atoms and molecules of air in the upper atmosphere. Many of these, however,
are repulsed by the Sun before they reach the near vicinity of the Earth, as
though shooed away by a protective mother hen.
The degree of cosmic ray protection we receive from the Sun depends upon
magnetic conditions on the surface of the star, which wax and wane in a
cycle of about eleven years. In the peak years of the cycle, when the extended
realm of the Sun (the heliosphere) is more disturbed, more alien particles are
turned away. In the valley years, at the minima of the solar cycle, there are
fewer disturbances in the heliosphere, and more cosmic rays intrude into the
solar system.
The last maximum of solar activity was reached in 2001. Today, as solar activity
has fallen to an apparent minimum in the 11-year cycle, the traffic of galactic
cosmic rays in the near-Earth environment is especially heavy. A few years from
now, when solar activity begins another climb—toward an expected sunspot
maximum in about 2013—the number of cosmic rays that reach the Earth will
again be diminished by about 15 percent.

What Gets By

Neither the magnetosphere nor the atmosphere is 100% successful in blocking

all that the Sun (or other more distant sources) sends in our direction. Usable
heat and light are allowed to pass, almost unchecked, as we would have them
do. As noted below, some of the Sun’s ultraviolet radiation, though depleted,
also makes its way to the ground.
Some of the charged solar particles that approach the Earth still find their
way into the upper atmosphere and magnetosphere. Most are caught and
temporarily stored within closed field lines of the Earth’s magnetic field, but
these, too can work their way, in time, into the upper atmosphere.
When these and other energetic particles collide with atoms of air about 100
miles above the surface, they provoke atoms of oxygen and nitrogen and certain
molecules to emit light in pure colors of green or red or blue. When conditions
5
Back to Table of Contents

are right, we can witness the intrusion of these escapees from either the Sun
or the Earth’s magnetospheric holding cell as brightly painted streaks of light
in the northern and southern sky: the transitory and ethereal displays of the
aurora borealis and aurora australis.
				
				
Nor are all the harmful rays of sunlight blocked from reaching the ground.
A fraction of the damaging solar ultraviolet radiation that pours down
unremittingly on the dayside of the Earth slips by the stratospheric ozone
shield, to continue downward as potentially-damaging, shorter-wavelength
UV-A and UV-B radiation.
The number of UV-A and UV-B rays that make it to the surface of the Earth
depends on the variable thickness and density of the stratospheric ozone layer;
on the distance the ultraviolet rays must travel through the remaining air that
lies beneath it; and on the clarity of the sky. It depends as well on how much
the Sun itself has generated, for solar ultraviolet radiation varies from day to
day and year to year, in step with changes on the surface of the Sun. But on any
day, a much greater fraction of damaging solar ultraviolet rays will reach the
ground (1) at high elevations (as in the Rocky Mountain west); (2) where the
Sun most often shines (as in southern Arizona); and (3) at lower latitudes (as
in Florida, Hawaii, or Australia) where sunlight passes more vertically through
the air and hence along a shorter path to reach the surface.

Voyages of Discovery in an Age of Exploration

T

he story of how we came to know all that happens just beyond the protective
walls of our atmosphere and magnetosphere is a tale of recent exploration. As is
that of how the near-Earth environment, and the walls themselves, are shaped
and battered by a highly variable Sun. While much had been learned about
both the Sun and the Earth, the space between them was, before the second
half of the last century, largely terra incognita: a void sketched in with theory
and supposition, much like the early maps of the known world that were drawn
before the epic voyages of Columbus and Magellan.
Although rocket-launched probes had briefly sampled the nearer reaches of
the upper atmosphere in the late 1940s, it was about the time when NASA
was established, in 1958, that longer and farther voyages of exploration at
last began.
The first of these were lofted into low-Earth orbits but several hundred
miles above the ground, to circle the planet at the ragged upper edges of our
6

atmosphere. Here only the last vestiges of air remain; the sky is no longer blue;
and the atmospheric pressure is reduced to less than a millionth of a millionth
of what we are accustomed to at the surface of the planet.
Others ventured further, into and beyond the Earth’s extended magnetosphere,
charting for the first time its form and content and asymmetry. Immediately
encountered in these early explorations were the Earth’s radiation belts: largely
unexpected swarms of captured electrons and protons and other charged
particles, entrapped by the Earth’s magnetic field and held there, as in a
magnetic cage.
The shape of the Earth’s magnetic field was found to be not the simple curved
lines of force like those traced out by iron filings above the poles of a bar
magnet, but a dynamic, distorted and distended structure: compressed flat on
the Sun-facing side by the persistent pressure of the solar wind, and stretched
out by the solar wind on the other side to well beyond the orbit of the Moon.
Further explorations into near-Earth space identified, at last, the solar sources
and ensuing chain of events responsible for the disturbances, called geomagnetic
storms, that had been detected and recorded by magnetic instrumentation on
the surface of the Earth since the middle 1800s.
Polar aurorae—the occasional displays of colored light in the nighttime sky
that had been described in lore and legend for at least 2000 years—were seen in
their entirety from the vantage point of space. Observed from above, what had
appeared from below as curtains of colored light were revealed in their entirety
as full rings of varying diameter, centered on the Earth’s magnetic poles.
There, much like a pair of neon signs, glowing circles of light define the zones
near the two poles of the planet where electrons and protons most easily find their
way down into the Earth’s upper atmosphere. And there—hundreds of miles
high—they spend their energies in aerial collisions with atoms of oxygen and
nitrogen. Some of these energetic particles come directly into the atmosphere
from the Sun; others from a cache of stored particles—some captured earlier
from the Sun, others from our own ionosphere—that are sequestered in the
Earth’s magnetotail.

A New Appreciation

In these voyages of discovery much was learned of the true nature of the Sun,

the real character of the near-Earth environment, and the form and functions
of the magnetosphere and the upper and middle atmosphere. But the truly
New World that was found in all these explorations was surely that of the winds
7
Back to Table of Contents

of charged particles that blow outward without respite from the Sun, in all
directions, including our own. At times these blow but briskly. At others, they
come far faster, driven by Krakatoan eruptions on the Sun that tear whole parts
of the star away and send them hurtling through the realm of the planets.
The principal legacies of this new age of discovery are a better definition and
more enlightened awareness of the very real effects of solar variations on the
planet on which we dwell: the realities that accompany the benefits of living
with a star. We suspected that the Sun’s total radiation varied: we now know
it does and by how much. And we have found that near-Earth space—just
beyond our door—is a place of tempestuous and often violent weather: not the
familiar weather of wind and rain and sleet and snow, but the space weather
of variable solar radiation, streams of energetic atomic particles and imbedded
magnetic fields, driven by the volatile moods of a near-by star.

The Consequences

Among the down-to-Earth consequences of an inconstant Sun are the impacts

of known or suspected variations in the Sun’s output of radiation and particles
on the climate of the Earth, and the effects of these changes in enhancing or
ameliorating the present global heating which is driven principally by increasing
greenhouse gases.
As important—societally, economically, and in terms of national security—are
the impacts of solar storms and eruptions on communications of all kinds,
from telephone to television; on navigational and other geographic positioning
systems; on the health and safety of passengers and crews in high-altitude jetaircraft flights that cross polar and sub-polar regions; on the operation and
integrity of electric power grids; on electronic devices of all kinds carried on
civil and military spacecraft; and on the safety of astronauts.
What is more and more apparent is that with technological advances and greater
sophistication in much of what we do, we lean more and more heavily on
systems that are exposed and vulnerable to changes on the Sun and in the near
environment of the Earth. Particularly vulnerable are manned space flights,
and most particularly those that venture beyond the protective shields of the
Earth’s atmosphere and magnetosphere; as on envisioned voyages to distant
Mars, on shorter travels to and from the Moon, and in connection with the
inhabited lunar colony that is now in early planning stages.
Truly essential in all of these impacted areas of everyday life and space
exploration is the ability to forecast space weather, day by day and in advance,
tailored to specific needs. The accuracy and utility of such forecasts lean heavily
8

on two essentials: (1) a thorough knowledge of the Sun-Earth system; and (2)
the availability of an ongoing stream of round-the-clock space weather data.
To meet this challenge, some twenty-six spacecraft are today in orbit around
the Earth or the Sun—or on further voyages of discovery, far from home—to
explore, patrol and monitor the complex, coupled Sun-Earth system. Their
purpose is to track, understand and ultimately predict the major changes on
the Sun and in near-Earth space that affect space weather and human endeavor.
Together, they make up an ongoing fleet of modern spacecraft, designed and
operated to complement each other, and to work together as an ongoing System
Observatory in near-Earth space.

An Interconnected System

O

ur knowledge of the Sun-Earth System has been acquired through the years
on a piece-by-piece basis, through the efforts of generations of men and women
in many countries. But in these early efforts, the focus was most often on the
exploration and study of isolated parts of the larger whole: the Sun, the Earth’s
magnetosphere, ionosphere or upper atmosphere, and ultimately, with the Age
of Space, the nature and dynamics of the interplanetary medium that fills the
void between the Earth and its distant Sun.
With new understanding came specialization and ultimately the emergence
of whole new fields of study including solar physics, aeronomy, atmospheric
physics and chemistry, and space, cosmic ray, magnetospheric, and ionospheric
physics. But as was always known, these are all connected together, like links
in a chain.
Advances made in recent years regarding the essential interdependence of these
elements of the chain, and the pressing need to forecast the impacts on the
modern world of solar-driven changes in this system have called for a more
holistic approach. And the emergence of the all-encompassing science of
heliophysics: the study of an interconnected system, extending from the soil
beneath our feet to the white-hot surface of the Sun, and including all that lies
between. The ultimate goal is an analytical working model of the coupled SunEarth system: a chain of interacting links that can replicate the impacts of solar
events on the Earth and human endeavor.
			
				
The intrinsic interconnectedness of almost everything, including the Earth and
all things in it, is a common theme today, though not at all a new one. “Pull up
9
Back to Table of Contents

any part of Nature,” said John Muir in the early 1900s, “and you will find its
roots entangled with all the rest.”
The same truth may have been expressed most eloquently a few years earlier by
the mystic poet Francis Thompson, in London, in 1893:
All things by immortal power, near or far,
hiddenly, to each other linkéd are;
that thou canst not stir a flower
without troubling of a star.
We know as well, today, that what happens on our own star—93 million miles
away—can perturb the Earth and trouble our own lives and well-being.

10

11
Back to Table of Contents

The disk of the Sun seen in the EUV in the light of singly-ionized helium, revealing the hotter (about 100,000° F) and more
disturbed upper chromosphere that lies above the more placid 10,000° F photosphere which appears to us as a featureless white
disk in the sky. The large loop of incandescent gas is a magnetically-formed extension of the chromosphere that reaches far into the
higher and ever hotter corona.

THE SUN
The Sun as a Star

T

he star we call the Sun is to us, of course, unique. Yet it is much like countless
others in the sky that burn as bright and for as long. Some stars like Betelgeuse,
a red supergiant star in Orion, are more than 500 times larger than ours, and
others are a hundred times smaller, no larger than the Earth. Some are older,
and many are younger. Among other stars in our Galaxy, our Sun is somewhat
atypical in the sense that it is hotter and more massive than 80 to 90% of the
rest. Still, were the Sun a person it would be seen by others around it in the sky
as large, late middle-aged, reasonably well-behaved, and moderately bright.
The diameter of the Sun is about 100 times that of the Earth: large enough
to hold about 1003, or a million planets the size of ours, were they somehow
stuffed inside it. While it doesn’t seem that distant, the Sun is 93 million miles
away, almost 400 times farther than our nearest neighbor, the Moon.

A Voyage to the Sun

W

ere we able to fly to the Sun in a commercial airliner at the speeds we
are now accustomed to, the one-way trip would take more than twenty years.
And after our arrival, should we choose to take a tour, a flight around the solar
equator at the same speed would consume another eight months’ time.
Once there we would find the star—though unbearably hot and blindingly
bright—diffuse and ephemeral: gaseous throughout, like the atmosphere of
the Earth, with no real boundary or surfaces. And nowhere to land. All we
would see, up close, would be the luminous radiating surface, or photosphere:
as bright and hot as a welder’s torch, and fully as hazardous to look upon.
As is the case when viewed through a simple telescope from the Earth, the
dimmer chromosphere, the graceful loops of solar prominences and the awesome
corona, which loom high above the photosphere, would be wholly invisible to us
in the awful glare of the searing white-hot, radiant surface. And this life-giving
layer in the gaseous Sun—the fount from which all sunbeams flow—would
appear not smooth and white but roiled and raging and turbulent: composed
of an irregular mosaic of the close-packed tops of gargantuan convection cells,
each carrying heat upward from deep within the Sun, like bubbles rising in a
witch’s cauldron.
13
Back to Table of Contents

Scattered among them, from place to place, we would soon recognize—in the
form of larger, slightly dimmer, gaping depressions—the fields of war where
magnetic fields, emerging from below, hold back and reduce for a time, though
not for long, the inexorable upward flow of convected heat. These are the wellknown and long-counted sunspots—many larger than the Earth—whose
numbers wax and wane in the course of an inexact cycle of about eleven years.
But nothing we see on the Sun, from near or far, is there to stay: like dancing
flames in a fireplace, all that is visible to us is impalpable, ethereal and ever
changing. The Sun is something of a paradox in this regard: the oldest, largest
and heaviest elephant in the solar system, tipping the scales at more than 1015
trillion tons, and yet—when seen up close—displaying an almost unbearable
lightness of being.
What is more, nothing that we see—not sunspots, not the bright surface nor
all that lies above it—is as dense as the last vestiges of air that remain at the
altitudes where satellites circle the Earth, hundreds of miles high, where the
barometric pressure is like that of a vacuum. Truth be told, had we taken our
imagined airplane voyage to the star, we could have kept on flying, on the
same course that took us there, directly into and inside the Sun. And although
the solar interior would get ever denser and hotter the deeper we go, we could
fly halfway toward the very center of the star—for eighteen days and another
quarter million miles—before reaching anything half as dense as the air we
breathe at home.
We could never do this, of course, because of the crushing pressure that
continues to increase the deeper we go inside the Sun; and in addition, the
searing heat we would have felt long before our solar aircraft ever reached the
photosphere.

Perpetual Combustion

W

hat should amaze us is how the Sun can burn so brightly and continuously
for so long a time. It is hard to imagine a fire so bright that we could feel its
heat a mile away. And harder still the heat from a fire a hundred or a thousand
miles away, no matter how large or hot it was.
Radiant heat from any source, large or small—the burner on a stove or the Sun
in the sky—rapidly diminishes, by the square of the distance, as one moves
away from it. Yet the heat emitted from the Sun—93 million miles away—is
so intense that out of doors on a summer day we seek the shade.

14

The Sun has been shining in this way for about 4.6 billion years, about one
third the age of the Universe itself, which is now thought to be 14 billion
years. And the Earth—which is almost as old—has for at least the last 3.8
billion years been bathed in very nearly the same level of solar radiation that
streams down on the planet today. The amount of solar light and heat that is
intercepted by the Earth is about 5500 kilowatts per acre, or almost 2 x 1014
kilowatts over the entire daylit hemisphere.
Because our planet is so small a target at so great a distance, the portion
of the Sun’s emitted energy that we receive on Earth is a truly negligible
fraction of what the profligate Sun pours out in all directions. The total
radiative power released by the Sun, day in and day out, is about 4 x 1023 or
400,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 kilowatts. And like every other star in the
sky, almost all of it is thoroughly wasted: thrown away and lost forever in the
cold and dark of empty space.
THE EIGHT PLANETS AND PLUTO AS SEEN FROM THE SUN
PLANET
Mercury

3000

Venus

7500

EARTH

7900

Mars

4200

Jupiter

88,000

Saturn

74,500

Uranus

31,600

Neptune

30,200

Pluto

DISTANCE
RELATIVE TO
THAT OF THE
EARTH

DIAMETER
IN MILES
.4

APPARENT SIZE
RELATIVE TO
THAT OF THE EARTH
1

.7

1.5
1

1
1.5

0.4
5

2
10

1
19

0.2
30

1900

39

0.1
0.0001

Nor is what we or any other planet receives fully utilized. About 60% of the
solar energy that arrives at the top of the atmosphere will make it to the surface
of the Earth: the rest is absorbed and put to work in the air, or reflected and
returned, unused, back into space. The amount that reaches the land or water
at any place depends of course on its latitude and altitude, the time of year, and
the clarity of the sky.
For the continental United States, the average daily radiation from the Sun
that falls on one acre of land is equivalent to the energy released in burning 11
barrels of oil; or in one year, about 4000 barrels.
Were the Sun to bill us at the oil-equivalent rate for the solar energy we receive,
the average annual Sunshine Tax, figured at $100 a barrel, would be $360,000
15
Back to Table of Contents

for each acre we owned; and in some places in the sunny South and West—
which receive almost twice as much sunlight as the continental average—well
over half a million dollars per acre.

The Hidden Source of Solar Energy

T

he Sun is indeed huge, but no combustible fuel it might contain could stoke
so hot a furnace so long a time; nor could a gradual gravitational shrinkage of
the star, which until about a hundred years ago was thought to be the source
of solar energy. It was then shown that given irrefutable evidence from geology
of an Earth extremely old, the rate of contraction that was needed to supply
the prodigious energy flowing outward from the Sun implied a grossly inflated
ancient star. In fact, one with so great a girth that at the time when early forms
of life were evolving on the Earth, our planet was tracing out its orbital path
far inside the star it circled.
The real secret of the Sun’s seemingly boundless energy—like that of all the
other stars—is instead the nuclear processes that are triggered by the staggering
pressures and temperatures deep within its central core: the fusion of single
atoms of hydrogen into helium, with the release of some of the energy in each
contributing atom in the form of heat. Because the Sun is made almost entirely
of hydrogen, which is used up only slowly, this simplest of nuclear processes
should continue to provide the Earth with adequate radiative energy for at least
another five billion years. At about that time—for those who worry about such
things—it is thought that the Sun will have used up its store of hydrogen fuel,
and will expand about 100 times in diameter to join the ranks of the so-called
red giant stars, like Arcturus and Capella.

Delayed Delivery

T

he heat created in the nuclear furnace, deep within the core of the Sun, works
its way gradually outward to stoke the glowing surface of the star, almost half
a million miles above the core. The path to freedom is at first exceedingly slow
and tortuous, for the energy released in nuclear fusion is transmitted outward
by individual collisions between single atoms of hydrogen and helium, in a
medium that is incredibly compressed. To the Sun—that must ultimately expel
every erg of newly released heat—the excruciating process of getting rid of it
must seem as frustrating as a game of pool, played on a table infinitely long that
is tightly packed from bumper to bumper with billiard balls.
The density of matter within the Sun decreases steadily from the core to the
surface of the star, and with fewer and fewer collisions farther and farther apart,
16

the initially slow process of heat transfer gradually accelerates with distance
from the center. Through the final third of the distance, the energy is no longer
passed upward to the glowing surface by collisions between neighboring atoms,
but carried up in bulk, through the upward movement of heated matter in
giant convective cells. But despite the added speed of this final dash to the
finish line, the heat that has finally worked its way outward from the core of the
Sun to the visible surface of the star will have spent, on average, about 100,000
years en route.
Once there—free at last—it escapes the Sun as radiant heat: to race onward
and outward at the speed of light. In but eight minutes it will reach the orbit of
the Earth. There in the warm sunshine of a summer’s day, we feel the heat the
Sun produced a tenth of a million years ago, when woolly mammoths shared a
simpler world with Stone Age men and women.

Radiant Energy from the Sun

Although the Sun also continually showers the Earth with energetic atomic

particles, all but about 0.00001% of the energy we receive from the star comes
to us in the form of radiant energy spanning a wide range, or spectrum, of
wavelengths. About 80% of it is given off in the form of light (the visible
spectrum, containing all the familiar colors of the rainbow) and as heat (the
infrared spectrum, which we feel but cannot see). Most of the rest comes in a
broad span of the more energetic and potentially harmful ultraviolet spectrum,
which is also invisible to our eyes. A small fraction—less than 1% of the total—
arrives in the form of even more energetic, potentially damaging, and also
invisible x-rays and gamma rays, and as harmless emissions in a wide spectrum
of radio waves at the other end of the electromagnetic spectrum.
It comes as no surprise, given the source of light in which life evolved, that the
spectral response of our own eyes is so similar to the spectral distribution of
radiation from the Sun. This is not the case for stars that are significantly hotter
or cooler than the Sun, whose peak emissions are shifted, respectively, toward
the violet or the red. Thus we bear in our genes an identifier of the type of star
with which we live.

17
Back to Table of Contents

red

orange

yellow

700 nm

green

600 nm

blue

500 nm

violet

400 nm

Wavelength

Frequency in Hz
104

106

108

1010

1012

1014

1016

Ultraviolet

Microwaves

Radio, TV Waves

Infrared

1018
Gamma Rays

X-rays

The portion of radiation from the Sun or other source that can be seen by the human eye as visible
light (upper bar) in the context of the full range of electromagnetic radiation. Electromagnetic radiation
is specified in terms of frequency of oscillation in cycles per second, or hertz (Hz) or alternately, the
corresponding distance between crests of adjoining waves (wavelength). Radio radiation, at the far left,
includes the lowest frequencies and the longest wavelengths, which can be as long as thousands of miles.
At the other end of the spectrum is gamma radiation, with wavelengths shorter than the dimensions of
a single atom.

How Constant Is and Was the Sun?

We should expect the Sun’s total output of radiant energy to be nearly constant,

by virtue of the enormous mass and thermal inertia of the star. Fluctuations
in energy production in the core, or elsewhere beneath the surface, should be
leveled out in the lengthy and tortuous processes through which heat is passed,
hand over hand, through the interior of the Sun.

More gradual changes over billions of years in the Sun’s luminosity are not ruled
out by this argument. And indeed, what we know of how stars like ours evolve
with time makes it almost certain that two or three billion years ago—when
the Earth was new and the Sun was young—the Sun was as much as a third
dimmer than today. Thus, in the course of its long life, it has indeed changed,
and by quite a bit.
We also know from geology and paleontology that much of the surface of the
Earth has been covered with water, and with life, for billions of years without
interruption. From that crude datum we can say that the Sun has never burned
so bright as to cause the oceans to boil during this long period of time. Nor so
feebly that all the oceans froze. But neither of these tells us very much regarding
the actual range, through time, of solar inconstancy.
18

What most of us should like to know is how constant and reliable is the Sun
today, and whether solar radiation has varied significantly in the past hundred or
perhaps a thousand years, and how much it will likely change in the future.

Metered Sunshine

We can now record, from minute to minute, all the changes that occur in the

total amount of sunshine that reaches the Earth. But only since 1978, when
the first precision instruments capable of making these difficult measurements
of total solar irradiance were put in orbit about the planet. Generations of
astronomers before that had attempted to answer this oldest of questions about
the Sun from the tops of mountains and other high elevation sites, but their
efforts were always limited by uncertainties in the variable absorption of solar
radiation in the Earth’s atmosphere.
We can now monitor as well the course of change in different spectral
components, such as the solar ultraviolet or solar infrared radiation. As
suspected, all forms of radiant energy that the Sun emits fluctuate on all time
scales. The greatest variability is found in the shortest wavelengths—in our
receipt of solar x-rays and ultraviolet radiation—and in the longest solar radio
waves. The least variability is found in the visible and near-infrared regions of
solar radiation. These latter two are also the greatest contributors, by far, to
the total amount the Sun emits. As a result, we should expect the total solar
irradiance, as measured at the Earth, to vary only slightly.
Continuous measurements taken since 1978 show that in this period the total
radiant energy received from the Sun at the top of our atmosphere has indeed
changed very little. But “constant” it is not, for it varies from minute to minute,
day to day, and year to year, largely in response to the changes we see on the
visible, white-light surface of the star. Darker (and hence cooler) sunspots,
competing with brighter and hotter areas found around them and around the
perimeters of convection cells continually tweak the total energy emitted from
the visible hemisphere of the Sun.
Due to these changes on the surface of the Sun, the heat and light delivered at
the top of our atmosphere can vary from day to day through a range of about
± 0.3%, and in annual average, from year to year, by about 0.07%. Neither of
these solar fluctuations is as large as the everyday fluctuations in the voltage
that supplies the lighting in our homes and places of work.
The change of about 0.07%, peak-to-peak, in annual-averaged measurements
of solar radiation is among the simplest and most predictable of solar variations,
for it marches to the drum beat of the well-known 11-year sunspot cycle. The
19
Back to Table of Contents

total radiation released by the Sun into space is—somewhat surprisingly—
greatest in those years when there are more sunspots on its surface, at which
time increased magnetic activity brightens other regions on its surface. It then
decreases by about 0.07% in the six or seven years it takes for solar activity to
decline to a minimum level, when fewer sunspots are found.
Though far smaller in magnitude than the effects of daily changes in cloud
cover or the annual variation of the Earth’s distance from the Sun, this periodic
change of 0.07% in total solar irradiance is enough to alter the temperature
of both the air and the surface oceans. And indeed, measurable changes of
the predicted amount and expected phase (warmer in years of maximum solar
activity) have now been found. The impacts of charged atomic particles from
the Sun—which also follow the 11-year solar cycle—could leave similar solar
marks on the global climate record. How much the outputs of the Sun vary over
longer periods of time is today a pressing and as yet unanswered question.

The First Who Saw the Face of the Sun

I

n Tuscany, in the summer of 1611, Galileo Galilei, then forty-seven, turned
his small telescope on the Sun and projected its image on a white screen an
appropriate distance beyond the eyepiece, where it was safe to view. At about
the same time, three other men, quite on their own and far away, had begun as
well to examine the bright disk of the Sun in the same way, like Galileo, with
the aid of the newly-invented telescope: Thomas Harriot in England, Johann
Goldsmid in Holland, and Christopher Scheiner in Rome. Though they would
never meet, these four early explorers of the sky—three scientists and a Jesuit
priest—were the first people to look so closely into the face of the star that
lights the world.
None of them, including Galileo, claimed to have “invented” the telescope,
which had been stumbled upon, purportedly by accident, in a spectaclemaker’s shop in Holland a few years before. But it was Galileo—who knew
the most about astronomy and optics and the art of reaching and convincing
others—who applied the newfound tool most critically and effectively.
His early telescopes, like those of his three competitors, magnified what one
could see with the eye alone by about a factor of thirty, and were made of rolled
metal tubes not more than an inch or two in diameter and about a yard long.
With these truly revolutionary devices Galileo had in 1609 and 1610, from his
home in Florence, first looked at the Moon (to find valleys and mountains); at
Jupiter (to discover four moons that circled that large and far away planet); at
the Milky Way (to find it filled with stars so numerous as to be almost beyond
20

belief ); and at Mercury, Venus, Mars, and distant Saturn: which, with Jupiter,
were at that time all the known planets in the sky.
What Galileo and the others found on the face of the Sun was a scattering of
small dark spots of varied sizes, which were not fixed in place, but seemed to
move from day to day across the solar disk. That there were imperfections of
any kind on what was deemed to be the Sun’s pure white surface may have
come as a surprise to all of these first telescopic observers, for sunspots were
not known in Europe or in most of the rest of the world at the time. In truth,
Galileo and his three contemporaries were not the first to find them. Dark
spots on the Sun, seen with the unaided eye, had been reported a long time
before, in ancient Greece, and on at least one occasion in medieval Russia. And
in China they had been more or less continuously observed, described and
recorded since well before the time of Christ.

A drawing of the full disk of the spotted Sun made in Florence by Galileo using a small telescope at about
2 o’clock in the afternoon of August 20, 1610, looking much as it does today.

21
Back to Table of Contents

Sunspots that are sufficiently large can be seen without the help of a telescope, at
those times or places when the blinding disk of the Sun is sufficiently dimmed.
This is possible, for instance, when the Sun is seen through the smoke of a forest
fire. One can also do it with the aid of a smoked glass filter that is sufficiently
dark; by reflection in water that is smooth and very still; through thick clouds
or haze; or at sunrise or sunset when the disk of the Sun is reddened by our
atmosphere.
Since well before the time of Christ, sunspots were watched for in one or more
of these ways by court astrologers in China (and later in Korea and Japan) who
read them in terms of portents, often dire. They also left behind a well-preserved
record of their relative sizes and when they were seen, in authorized dynastic
histories. But without the help of a telescope, these early Eastern watchers of
the sky could not clearly resolve the dark spots which they saw come and go on
the face of the Sun, beyond simple, intriguing descriptions such as “as large as
a plum”, or sometimes “a duck’s egg”.
Galileo was in a position to make this distinction, and soon did. He concluded
that the dark spots were too irregularly shaped to be planets encircling the
Sun—as church apologists, including Father Scheiner in Rome, had hastened
to propose. They were instead dark features on the Sun’s own surface: which
was not at all a divinely perfect fire. He also deduced from the manner in
which sunspots appeared to move across its face that the Sun rotated, in a
period of about 26 to 27 days, and that the Sun’s axis of rotation was tilted by
a few degrees.

Father Christopher Scheiner and another cleric tracing the image of the spotted Sun early in the 17th
century, by projecting the image of a long focus telescope on a sheet of paper. The etching is from
Scheiner’s massive book on sunspots, the Rosa Ursina, published in Latin in 1630.

22

These robust findings, he concluded, strongly supported the proposition put
forward more than half a century earlier by the astronomer Nicholas Copernicus
in Poland. Namely, that the Earth was not the center of the universe, fixed in
space with the planets and the Sun and all the other stars rotating once each
day around it, as had long been taught. Instead, it is the Earth that moves
around the Sun, spinning on its own axis once each day, while tracing out a
year-long course around a tilted, turning and imperfect Sun.
To church authorities—the Christian fundamentalists of his day—these thencontroversial views were deemed heretical in that they appeared to contradict
the literal interpretation of certain words in the Holy Bible. For this perceived
transgression, Galileo—a devout Catholic—was brought to trial in Rome.
There he was found guilty of heresy; made to publicly recant what he had said
and written; forbidden to teach or publish; and held under house arrest for the
remaining years of his life, until the day of his death in 1642.

The Long Watch

Because the photosphere is easily viewed and ever changing, this best known

layer of the gaseous Sun has been kept under nearly continuous telescopic
surveillance since Galileo’s time: watched and monitored through the years by
an unending succession of both amateur and professional astronomers. As a
result, there exists today in the form of collected descriptions, drawings, and
ultimately, photographs, a diary of our star that tells first-hand of changes on
the face of the Sun through a span of nearly 400 years.
The white light Sun was regularly watched and carefully documented throughout
the 17th and 18th centuries, fueled by the European re-discovery of sunspots
in 1611; by Galileo’s short book, published in 1613, announcing his findings;
by Father Scheiner’s massive shelf-bending tome, published in Latin in 1630,
which with elegant illustrations, detailed his own daily observations of sunspots;
and by the interest of nearly every astronomer of note in the course of those
two centuries.
Since early in the 19th century there are observations on record of how the
face of the Sun appeared on every day of every year. And in 1848 the longkept watch was organized into an international effort. Not long after, daily
photographs of the solar disk were added to the global patrol; although daily
drawings of the spotted Sun—made much as Galileo and Scheiner had done—
were still employed for certain purposes for another hundred years and more.
The reasons for keeping so continuous a watch on the Sun changed through
the centuries. Initially it was intellectual curiosity and a search for answers: to
23
Back to Table of Contents

identify the characteristics and behavior of the dark spots (in Latin, maculae)
and the bright patches (called, in part to rhyme with this, faculae, or little
torches) that were often seen in close proximity to them when they were
observed near the edge of the solar disk. What causes these bright and dark
marks on the face of the Sun? What do they tell of the health of the star, or of
its inconstancy? In what ways might they affect the Earth?
With the announcement, in 1843, of a more or less regular variation in the
number of spots seen on the Sun—rising and falling again in a period of about
ten years (later eleven)—the interest in sunspots increased.
Not long after that time, observations of the photosphere made with the
new-found spectroscope made it possible to determine the temperatures and
pressures and eventually the strengths of the magnetic fields in sunspots and
other features of the photosphere. It was these that at last unlocked the secrets
of the changing face of the Sun.
Sunspots were darker because they were almost 30% cooler than the 10,000° F
temperature of the surrounding photosphere. They were cooler because they
defined those places on the white-hot surface of the star where strong magnetic
fields, emerging from below the visible surface, inhibited the upward flow of
heat from the interior of the Sun. Faculae were brighter because they were
denser and hotter than the surrounding photosphere, and they too were related
to the surface magnetic field.
In short, the Sun—though indeed dependable and in the long term, quite
constant—was found to be a moody magnetic star on which internallygenerated magnetic fields affect the inexorable upward flow of heat from deep
within it. Moreover the appearance and demeanor of its radiating surface are
entirely driven by the contortions and interactions of immensely powerful
magnetic fields: what Oliver Wendell Holmes called “the maelstroms of the
photosphere” in a prescient poem composed in 1882.

The Sun That We Can See

T

he photo- (or light) sphere is the name given the white-hot glowing layer of
the gaseous Sun where almost all visible light and infrared heat originate. As
such it is the deepest layer within the star that we can see directly with our eyes,
and the deepest from which we can feel solar heat.
Nearly all the red, orange, yellow, green, blue and violet rays that we receive
from the Sun—which when seen together, appear to us as white—come from
the photosphere. As does the rainbow, which is but white light from the
24

photosphere pulled apart in its passage through mist or rain and then fanned
out to form a looming arc of the Sun’s original palette of colors.
The same is true for the blue of the sky. It too is white sunlight from the Sun’s
bright photosphere, scattered over the dome of the day-lit sky by intervening
molecules of air. This physical process preferentially scatters the blue and violet
rays to lend color to the sky, while letting the rest of the sunlight slip through
unseen. But like beauty itself, the blue we see and artists paint lies mostly in
the eye of the beholder, for in truth, the daytime sky is predominantly violet. It
is only our own retinas—which are less sensitive to violet light—that produce
the beautiful blue.

The Photosphere

T

oday the photosphere is watched and monitored around the clock from
solar telescopes in solar observatories around the world—and from the vantage
point of space—with ever-better clarity and magnification.
One of the purposes for this close and continuing watch is to improve what
we know of how photospheric features, including sunspots and faculae, alter
the amount of heat and light that we receive each day from the Sun. Another
is to refine our knowledge of the causes and sources of explosive solar flares,
eruptive prominences, and coronal mass ejections, all of which originate in
photospheric magnetic fields.
Behind each of these activities is our growing need to anticipate those solar
changes that impact an ever more crowded and more technical world. Toward
these ends, each improvement in our ability to look more clearly into the face
of the Sun is a step in the right direction.
From his back yard in Florence and using his best telescope, employing the glass
lenses he had ground himself, Galileo in 1611 was able to distinguish individual
features on the Sun that were as small as about 2000 miles across—roughly the
size of the Moon, or the continent of Australia—but nothing smaller than that.
With early improvements in the telescope, Father Scheiner in the 1620s was
able to resolve details within sunspots that were about two times smaller than
what Galileo had been able to see, or about the size of Alaska. Fifty years ago,
although telescopes were by that time much improved, what could be seen
on the Sun from even the best observing sites was limited by turbulence and
irregularities in our own atmosphere to features that were no smaller than the
state of Texas, roughly 500 miles across.
Revolutionary advances in optics and technology have followed since then.
Solar telescopes in space operate far above the blurring atmosphere and offer
25
Back to Table of Contents

The solar disk seen in white light from the SOHO spacecraft on October 28, 2003, showing (near the
bottom in this figure) an unusually large and complex sunspot group which give birth to fast-moving
coronal mass ejections and some of the largest solar x-ray flares ever recorded. The area encompassed by
the large group of spots equaled that of at least 15 Earths, surpassing the size of Jupiter.

as well the ability to see the Sun in ultraviolet and x-ray wavelengths, not
visible from the ground, as well as the ability to continuously observe the Sun’s
chromosphere and corona.
Ground-based solar telescopes, utilizing computer-controlled adaptive optics
that automatically and continually compensate for irregularities in the air above
them, are now able to distinguish features as small as 50 miles wide on the
disk of the Sun. With the aid of this powerful new technology, the Advanced
Technology Solar Telescope (ATST)—now under design at the National Solar
Observatory—will allow tomorrow’s solar observers to see and examine features
as small as 12 miles in scale on the face of Sun, the size of downtown Denver,
from 93 million miles away.
26

Sunspots

Far and away the best known features of the Sun are the black spots—ranging

in size from too small to see with any telescope, to twice the size of the Earth—
which are seen on its face in varying numbers on almost every day of every year.
At no time are sunspots scattered over the whole Sun. They appear instead in
restricted belts of solar latitude that gradually migrate from high solar latitudes
toward the Sun’s equator in the course of every 11-year sunspot cycle.

They also are most often clustered in separated groups, like flocks of birds.
Individual spots are born small, grow in the course of their lifetime of days to
weeks and sometimes months, and then fade from view. As Galileo noted, they
all move systematically from the left or eastern edge of the Sun toward the right
or western limb, carried along like autumn leaves on a brook, as the star turns
slowly on its axis, completing each solar rotation in about 27 of our days.
E

East

W

South

West

A schematic view of the horizon showing the daily east-to-west path of the Sun through the sky (as a
dashed blue line), the direction of the Sun’s rotation about its axis (as a red arrow) and the east and west
limbs of the solar disk.

When seen through a small telescope of the sort that Galileo employed, most
larger sunspots are found to consist of a darker and hence somewhat cooler
central region—the umbra, meaning shadow, or shade—surrounded by a less
dark fringe—the (partially shaded) penumbra. A closer examination of the
penumbra reveals that it is made up of what look a lot like buttonhole stitches
sewn around the perimeter of an umbral hole. In reality, these penumbral
features are towering arches of heated solar gas that flow both into and out of
the umbra of the sunspot, constrained by curved lines of magnetic force.
Any and all unsolved mysteries regarding sunspots—why they appear darker
and take the varied shapes they do, where they come from, and what purpose
they serve—were swept away forever when it was demonstrated, early in the
last century, that sunspots are the sites of highly concentrated magnetic fields.
27
Back to Table of Contents

To summarize: sunspots are darker than the surrounding disk of the Sun
because—though very hot by terrestrial standards—they are considerably
cooler than the rest of the photosphere: about 7000° F instead of 10,000.
They are cooler because they mark the places where lines of magnetic force,
emerging from the churning interior of the star, are concentrated and clustered
together, forming a kind of magnetic plug which at those places inhibits the
upward flow of heat.
The penumbral arches delineate the boundary where the tightly packed vertical
field lines in the umbra of a sunspot begin to spread and fan out, like the
bloom on a lily.

A close-up, color-added view of the dark centers (umbrae) of sunspots; the less-dark, magneticallyformed penumbrae that generally encircle them; and the ubiquitous pattern of close-packed tops of the
convective cells that characterize the entire photospheric surface of the Sun. This unusually clear image
was made from the mountain-top La Palma observatory in the Canary Islands using the Swedish 1-meter
high-resolution solar telescope, which employs automatically-adjusted optics to continually compensate
for the blurring effects of turbulence in the Earth’s atmosphere.

28

Bright Faculae

Brighter (and hence hotter) regions on the photosphere, called faculae, are

another consequence of solar magnetic fields. A dermatologist would probably
describe them as a rash of luminous blotches on the face of the Sun: larger
and far more irregular in shape than sunspots; not as much brighter than the
surrounding photosphere as sunspots are darker; but more extensive and spread
over a larger area of the solar disk. They are also more ephemeral—living but
a day or so—and ever changing. The largest are found in the close vicinity of
sunspots, and like them the area of the Sun covered by faculae rises and falls in
step with the 11-year sunspot cycle.
Due to their lower contrast, faculae are not easily seen with a simple telescope.
This did not stop Galileo and Scheiner and the other early 17th century
astronomers from finding them when these subtle brightenings were near the
edge (or limb) of the solar disk, where they are far more apparent.

The faculae we see near the left or eastern edge of the Sun are carried by solar
rotation toward the center of the solar disk where their apparent brightness—
relative to the surrounding photosphere—rapidly fades, and they soon drop
out of sight. A week or so later when the same facular areas approach the
right-hand, western limb of the Sun they once again become more apparent.
The reason why faculae can be seen at the edge but not the middle of the solar
disk follows from their towering form and the background against which they
are seen.
Faculae consist of vertical columns of magnetically-constrained gas that is
hotter and hence brighter than the photospheric surroundings through which
it flows. Because of this, faculae on the face of the Sun increase the total amount
of heat and light that the Sun emits and we receive. The sunspots that labor
beside them to hold back the outward flow of energy from within the star
work in the opposite way, to diminish the total, in an ongoing Yin and Yang
relationship that is probably as old as the Sun itself.
It never ends in a draw. In terms of day-to-day changes it is sunspots that
hold the upper hand—and a heavy one—turning down the Sun’s output of
energy on any day by as much as several tenths of a percent. But in the longer
run—when averaged over months to years—the faculae prevail, aided in part
by other bright features of smaller scale more uniformly distributed on the
solar surface that are even more difficult to see.
Both the number of spots and the prevalence of faculae rise and fall together
in the course of the 11-year solar activity cycle. Since it is the bright features
29
Back to Table of Contents

(and not the sunspots) that play the heavier hand, the Sun brightens and the
heat and light we receive from the Sun systematically increases in the maximum
years of the cycle. When there are fewer and fewer sunspots—in years of lower
solar activity—the total radiation decreases. And although the change is less
than 0.1 percent, it is enough to perturb our climate system, in part through
persistence, by pushing in the same direction for months or years at a time.

Beneath the Shining Surface:
The Bubble Machine

T

he photospheric background against which sunspots appear is itself highly
structured: made up of a closely-packed honeycomb of brighter elements, each
bounded by darker lanes. This intriguing, almost geometrical pattern, first
described more than 200 years ago, covers the entire surface of the Sun, from
pole to pole. Because the close-packed elements looked something like small
pellets or grains, they were initially called granules, and the overall pattern the
solar granulation.
Today we know that what we see as the granular, mottled photosphere is in fact
the top surface of a deep convective layer that fills the entire outer third of the
Sun’s interior. Within this vast and ever churning region, some 150,000 miles
deep, intensely hot gases heated by the Sun’s nuclear furnace, far below, are made
more buoyant and hence propelled upward—like bubbles in a heated kettle.
After continual jostling, interaction and exchange, some make it to the surface
of the star. There in the crowded company of billions of other glowing granules
they cool by giving up some of their energy in the form of radiant heat and light.
Once cooled and therefore heavier, the hot gases within them sink down once
more beneath the surface, to be reheated and fight their way to the top again.
The heated cells take their honeycomb form in a variety of shapes and sizes.
The smallest we can yet discern are about 100 miles across; the average, twice
the size of Texas; and the largest are about as big as the continental USA. But
life at the top is a fleeting thing for any of them, large or small. Once there,
they have but a few minutes in the limelight before up-and-coming others
crowd into their place.
To help discharge their cargo of heat while at the surface of the Sun, each
convective cell is internally stirred by patterns of flow that circulate hot gases
upward in the center, outward toward the perimeter and then back down again
at the sides. And while examples of churned mixing of this kind come readily
to mind—as in a kitchen blender, or when stirring paint in a can—none of
30

them works as fast or frenetically as these gigantic mixers on the Sun. Within
each solar convective cell, the hot streaming gases are carried up, across, and
down not like batter in a bowl but at the dizzying speed of a mile each second:
faster than a speeding bullet.

Lifting the Veil: The Unseen Sun

A

lmost all that is known of the Earth’s interior has been obtained indirectly,
without ever seeing or sampling it. Particularly valuable is the application
of seismology: the science by which one can probe the actual interior of
the Earth by the way sound waves—initiated at the surface—are bent and
reflected back again.
The study of the hidden interior of the Sun—of what lies beneath the
photosphere—has made use of the same techniques, which in this application
is called helioseismology: the study of the solar interior based on observable
oscillations on its surface.
In terrestrial seismology, the disturbances that initiate sound waves include
earthquakes and other natural tremors of opportunity as well as man-made
disturbances that are set off for this purpose. In the case of the Sun the force
that induces sonic waves is the ever-present piston-like up and down movement
of material in the solar convection zone: like rambunctious children jumping
up and down with all their might on the bed in a motel room.
In response to this incessant hammering, the entire photosphere is made to
oscillate, in distinctive patterns of undulating waves that slosh slowly up and
down, in a regular period of about five minutes. Some of this created energy is
thought to heat the chromosphere and corona. Another part is directed back
into the interior of the star, in the form of sound waves. These waves, as they
pass through the nether world of the Sun, are refracted (or bent) by differences
in the internal properties of the solar interior.
The bent paths of these solar sonic waves—like those that are employed to probe
the inner Earth—ultimately take them back to the surface again, where they
perturb the natural oscillation of the photosphere. It is these subtle differences
in solar oscillation, measured and compared from point to point on the surface
of the Sun, that are now used to reveal many of the secrets of the innermost Sun.
For these purposes data are taken both from spacecraft and from a dedicated
around-the-world network of automated ground-based stations.
The application of these techniques have confirmed the existence of a deep
convection zone and plumbed its very bottom, 150,000 miles deep. They have
31
Back to Table of Contents

helped illuminate what happens just beneath a sunspot, and the depth at which
the bundled magnetic field lines that give it form and function begin to block
the upward flow of heat within the Sun. And they have shed a bright new light
on the origins of the Sun’s varying internal magnetic field and the mechanisms
within the Sun that control the birth, the places of birth and the regularlyvarying numbers of sunspots and related features of solar magnetic activity that
affect our own lives in down-to-Earth ways.
				
				
					
The most fundamental finding from helioseismology, thus far, is probably the
clear-cut information it provides on how the inner Sun rotates, and how the
rate of rotation changes with depth and latitude.
There is no reason to expect that the squishy, gaseous Sun should rotate like a
spinning bowling ball—at the same rate everywhere, inside and out. Indeed,
it has been known since Galileo’s time that different latitudes on the surface of
the Sun rotate at different speeds: completing a turn about five days faster at
the equator than near the poles. Were the Earth to follow that solar recipe, the
number of hours in a day (say, from noon to noon) would depend upon one’s
latitude: with each day in Anchorage or Saskatoon several hours longer than
one spent on the beach at Waikiki.
Helioseismology has shown that the rate of rotation of the Sun also varies
considerably with depth.
The Sun’s convection zone—much like the visible surface of the star—rotates
much faster at lower solar latitudes than it does nearer the poles. At the equator,
it takes about 27 days for matter on the solar surface and in the convection
zone beneath it to complete one full turn around the rotational axis of the Sun.
Near the poles it takes almost half again as long to make the trip.
One consequence of this internal differential rotation is the distortion and
twisting of sub-surface magnetic field lines. Magnetic lines of force within
the Sun—which would otherwise run from pole to pole—are by differential
rotation twisted into toroidal magnetic fields which lie in planes perpendicular
the Sun’s axis of rotation. This is one of the forces that bring internal magnetic
fields to the surface to appear as sunspots and other manifestations of solar
magnetic activity.
A second level at which differential rotation occurs is deep within the solar
interior, at the depth where the bottom of the convection zone comes in contact
with the hotter, deeper, denser, and dynamically different radiative zone that
32

lies beneath it. At this level and below, solar material rotates as though it were
indeed a solid inner sphere, in twenty-seven days—which is at high latitudes
much faster than the convection zone that lies immediately above it. Nearer the
equator it spins more slowly than the overlying convection zone.

The spherical Sun sectioned to show what lies beneath the chromospheric surface of the star. Within the
bright central core (white) atomic hydrogen under extreme pressure and temperature fuses to create atoms
of helium with an accompanying release of energy, which will ultimately escape from the photosphere.
Surrounding the core is a vastly larger radiative zone (light orange) through which solar energy is passed
outward from atom to atom by the process of radiation, like warmth from a room heater. When the energy
passed in this way gets about two-thirds of the way to the surface of the Sun, it is transmitted further upward
by the mechanical motion of circulating cells within the tumultuous convective zone (dark orange).

The result is continuous slippage and shear within a thin and troubled layer,
called the tachocline, which separates these two interior shells.
It is also thought that the tachocline may be the layer where all solar magnetic
fields are conceived, and as such, a fundamental piece of the basic mechanism—
known as the solar dynamo—which drives eleven year and longer fluctuations
in solar magnetic activity.
33
Back to Table of Contents

The Sun’s Chromosphere and Corona

Although it looks that way when seen with the unaided eye or viewed through

a simple telescope, the well-defined edge of the Sun is not its outer boundary.
The familiar white photosphere is only the brightly shining core of a far larger
star. Were the rest of the Sun (the chromosphere and corona) as bright it would
appear more than ten times larger, and bounded by an ever-changing ragged
and asymmetric shape.
The chromosphere is the relatively-thin, tenuous layer of the Sun that lies just
above the photosphere. The name chromo- (or color) sphere comes from how
this layer in the solar atmosphere appears during a total solar eclipse, when
for but a few fleeting moments—just before and just after the moving Moon
completely covers the full disk of the Sun—we see it edge on, in the intense
red light of hydrogen.
Just above it is the more tenuous and far more extensive corona: literally the
crown of the Sun, which is so completely different from the rest of the star that
it seems like a ghostly other-world appendage. Contributing to this impression
is the fact that this very real part of the Sun is so rarely seen. For most people,
the only chance will come if they seek out or happen to be caught within the
small, speeding shadow of the Moon (about 100 miles in diameter) during a
total eclipse of the Sun, which last at most seven minutes. Because this happens
at a given place, on average, only about once in 400 years, almost all who
through time have lived on this planet never saw it, as most people today
probably never will.

The chromosphere and corona, in part because they are more tenuous and
diffuse, are so much less bright than the disk of the Sun that under normal
conditions they are blocked from our view: much as the bright headlights of a
close-approaching truck bar us from seeing the vehicle itself. And though a part
of the Sun, they obey a quite different set of rules. Both the chromosphere and
corona are non-uniform and highly structured, ever changing, often explosive,
and shaped by magnetic forces into forms of awesome beauty.
				
				
What is most surprising is that these outer reaches of the star are far hotter
than the glowing photosphere that lies just below them, which flies in the
face of all common experience and intuition. We expect the temperature in
the vicinity of an internally-heated object, like the Sun or a cast-iron stove, to
drop, not rise, as we move farther away from the source of its heat. But because
of their make-up, these outer layers of the Sun are not bound by these laws of
34

thermodynamics. Other, non-radiative sources of energy must be involved,
although identifying them with certainty remains a challenge.
What heats the chromosphere and corona to such high temperatures? The
auxiliary source of heat is most likely found in either the intense magnetic
fields that thread these layers of the solar atmosphere, and/or the mechanical
energy deposited at the base of the chromosphere from the relentless pounding
of convection cells: the same source that imposes the undulating, five-minute
patterns of oscillations in the photosphere. What is not fully understood is how
mechanical energy deposited at the base of these cloud-like extensions of the
Sun can heat the chromosphere and corona so far above it so efficiently.
From the core of the Sun outward the temperature falls steadily, mile after
mile, through a distance of almost half a million miles: from about 29 million
degrees Fahrenheit in the nuclear furnace to about 10,000°F at the radiating
surface of the photosphere. For another few hundred miles above this visible
boundary the temperature continues to coast downward until, about a quarter
of the way through the thin overlying chromosphere, it has fallen to about
7000°.
There the temperature of the Sun abruptly reverses its long and leisurely fall.
Within a very short distance above that point the temperature of the thin
chromosphere jumps to about 20,000° F. Just above the chromosphere, in an
even thinner transition zone that separates it from the corona, the temperature
is ten times higher. And not far above that, in the new and different world of
the solar corona, temperatures are measured in millions of degrees.
				
				
The photosphere consists of both neutral and ionized atoms, as well as some
molecules. With each increase in temperature—as one moves through the
chromosphere and transition zone and into the corona—more of the atoms
and molecules of any and all chemical elements are stripped of more and more
of their electrons, producing more ions, carrying a positive charge, and free
electrons with a negative one.
A collection of charged particles of this kind—common in the atmospheres
of stars—which contains roughly equal numbers of electrons and positively
charged ions, defines a fourth state of matter: not the solids, liquids or gases
of our ordinary experience, but highly ionized atomic particles—or plasma. In
this altered state it has sold its soul to magnetism, and is now subject to every
whim of the lines of strong magnetic forces, rooted in the convection zone and
photosphere, that twist and weave their way through the atmosphere of the
35
Back to Table of Contents

Sun. In truth, above the photosphere all that is left of the star is controlled, in
form and in function, by the Sun’s magnetic field.
These magnetic lines of force confine and shape the solar plasma, molding it
into the many forms that distinguish and decorate the outer atmosphere of the
Sun. In the chromosphere, some magnetic field lines corral and organize the
hot solar plasma into a pattern of close-packed super-sized granulation cells,
10,000 to 20,000 miles across and but 1000 miles deep, covering the entire
Sun. The super-granulation cells that make up this overlying chromospheric
network are bounded at their edges by hedgerows of tall, magnetically-formed
spicules—or spikes—that carry hot confined plasma upward into the corona.
The largest and longest lived of the many magnetically-sculpted features in
the chromosphere are the protuberances, now called solar prominences, that
protrude in a variety of shapes high into the far hotter corona. They are for
the most part formed of magnetic loops, the most spectacular of which appear
above the edge of the Sun as towering arches—some active, some inactive or
quiescent—that extend from about 30,000 to as much as 250,000 miles above
the photosphere. In form and grandeur these large loops of cooler plasma look
a lot like the Gateway Arch—were it painted a fiery red—that soars above St.
Louis on the banks of the Mississippi: or croquet hoops of colossal scale, some
tall enough for mighty Jupiter, the largest of the planets, to roll quite easily
through them.		
				
				
Much of the lower corona is made up of magnetically-formed arches whose
foot-points are rooted in the photosphere in regions of opposite magnetic
polarity, most often in sunspots. In solar images made in the x-ray region of
the spectrum, where radiation emitted by a million-degree plasma is best seen,
the lower corona of the Sun is so heavily stitched with these magnetic loops
that it looks a lot like one side of a Velcro fastener, awaiting the closure that
will never come.
Coronal magnetic fields at low and middle latitudes shape the outward-flowing
coronal plasma into tapered forms, called coronal streamers, which extend far
into interplanetary space. Against the darkened sky of a total eclipse of the Sun,
these graceful extensions of the outer solar atmosphere are made visible to us,
looking very much like the petals of a white dahlia.
We see these and other features of the white and ghostly corona at times of a
total solar eclipse not by their own weak emission of light but by the scattering
or redirection of white light coming upward from the photosphere.
36

The white clouds we see in the sky are visible to us through a similar process:
in this case the scattering of white sunlight by the microscopic water droplets
which we would otherwise not see. The same scattering process illuminates
nighttime fog in the bright headlights of an automobile, and droplets of mist
that appear as a spherical glow around a street light.
In the corona the scattering particles are electrons which are particularly efficient
scatterers. What we do not see in the corona are the protons and ions which
are also present. Since these atomic particles are far heavier than electrons, they
respond less readily to incident light from the photosphere. Like the Moon, or
the water droplets that make up clouds, we see the scattering electrons only in
the reflected light of the photosphere. Like clouds on Earth the outer corona
is white because the photosphere is white. Were it purple or green the corona
would be also.
Thus, during the few rare minutes of a total solar eclipse we are allowed to
see—from 93 million miles away—the two ingredients of which the corona is
made: electrons, which are so small that it would take 1030 of them to weigh
1/3 of an ounce; and the lines of force of the Sun’s magnetic field, which like
steel girders give shape and form to all coronal features.
Where coronal streamers appear and how fully they surround the central disk
of the Sun is determined by the location and strengths of magnetic fields on the
surface of the star. Because of this, the appearance of the corona, however it is
observed, changes considerably from day to day and systematically from year
to year with changing levels of solar activity.
The high latitude corona has its own distinctive appearance. There, the radial
extension of the Sun’s polar magnetic field arranges the coronal plasma into a
crown of spreading polar plumes that encircle the poles, as though to guard
them, like illumined palisades.
TEMPERATURES BENEATH, AT, AND ABOVE THE VISIBLE
SURFACE OF THE SUN
LOCATION

TEMPERATURE IN DEGREES (F)

Nuclear fusion interior

29 million°

Photosphere

11,000°

Sunspot Umbra
Low Chromosphere

7000°
18,000°

Transition zone

180,000°

Inner Corona

2 million°

for comparison:

Industrial Blast Furnace
Oxy-acetylene Flame

2000°
6300°

Iron-welding Arc

11,000°

37
Back to Table of Contents

How We See the Corona and Chromosphere

Two constraints keep us from seeing the Sun’s outer atmosphere under ordinary

viewing conditions. The first is the great difference between the brightness of
the corona and underlying chromosphere and the adjacent photosphere, due
to the immense difference in the density of matter in these outer and more
ethereal layers. The chromosphere is ten thousand times dimmer than the
photosphere when seen in the visible spectrum. The corona, in the innermost
and brightest regions, is almost a million times dimmer than the brilliance of
the adjacent solar disk.
In addition, since the density within the corona decreases with height, its own
brightness rapidly fades with increasing distance from the limb of the Sun,
until it approaches the limits of practical detection: soon ten million, then
a hundred million, then a thousand million times dimmer than the bright
photosphere.
The second obstacle is the competing brightness of the sky itself, which no
matter how clear and blue, is far brighter than the solar corona, and particularly
in the sky immediately surrounding the Sun, which is precisely where the
corona appears. Nor can we hope to catch a fleeting glimpse of the corona or
the chromosphere just as the Sun dips below the horizon, or as it slides behind
a cloud or the edge of a barn, for the brightness of the daylit sky around it will
still defeat our every try.
Until fairly recently the only way to see the Sun’s corona was the way it was
first discovered: in the fleeting moments and within the restricted geographical
bounds of a total solar eclipse. A total eclipse occurs, somewhere on our planet,
about every year and a half; but as noted earlier, at a particular place, be it
London or Topeka, Kansas, only very rarely.
During a total solar eclipse, the Moon—a quarter of a million miles away—
blocks for a few minutes the bright light of the photosophere before it can reach
and illuminate the atmosphere of the Earth. Through these rare windows of
opportunity—most often in far away places with strange sounding names—we
are allowed to see the outer atmosphere of the Sun in all its glory, against the
background of a sky turned suddenly dark and filled with other stars.
For a few seconds of these few minutes, we can also catch a fleeting glimpse of
the chromosphere as well, as a thin, red-colored layer just beneath the corona, as
well as any large prominences that happen to lie at the edge of the Sun. Unlike
the corona, the denser and cooler chromosphere and prominences shine by their
own weak radiation, which is dominated in the visible spectrum by the same
38

An exquisite photograph of the solar corona, also taken in India during the total eclipse of the Sun that
happened to cross that then independent nation on August 14, 1980. Magnetically-formed, bulbousbased coronal streamers—long described as resembling the petals of a dahlia—reach outward into space
from both low and high solar latitudes, as is typical at the maximum phase of the 11-year activity cycle,
when this image was made. Coronal streamers of the type seen here can be torn free of the Sun in the
course of violent eruptions and thrown bodily outward as gigantic blobs of ejected coronal plasma into
interplanetary space.

39
Back to Table of Contents

red-colored emission from atomic hydrogen that colors the aurora borealis and
australis.The chromosphere, brighter than and not as elusive as the corona, can
also be observed on a routine basis, and over the entire disk of the Sun, without
the need for an eclipse: using a spectrograph or narrow optical filters designed for
this purpose. These optical devices accomplish this feat by isolating the sunlight
in narrow spectral lines that are particularly bright in the chromosphere, such as
the red emission line of atomic hydrogen mentioned above.
Limited observations of the inner corona, made without the need for an
eclipse, have also been possible for more than fifty years, employing specialized
telescopes called coronagraphs. These employ optical techniques to create, in
effect, an artificial eclipse of the Sun within the telescope itself, and have been
operated for decades from mountain-top observatories where the daytime sky
is clearer and a darker blue. But until they could be carried into space—where
the Sun is always shining and the sky is always black—coronagraphs on the
ground could never replicate, in either extent or spatial detail, what one saw of
the corona in the brief moments of natural eclipses of the Sun.
Today, coronagraphs carried on spacecraft monitor and observe the Sun’s outer,
white-light corona around the clock, day after day and year after year. They
also provide images that in many ways surpass those obtained at solar eclipses
or with coronagraphs on the ground. And since they operate continuously,
spaceborne coronagraphs are able to identify and follow changes in the corona
that elude the still photographs taken with eclipse cameras. In but one day a
coronagraph mounted on a spacecraft above the Earth’s atmosphere provides
more minutes of coronal observing time than what could have been accrued at
all the total eclipses of the Sun in the last 1000 years.
Extant photographs of the solar corona taken at eclipse—which began within
a decade after Louis-Jacques-Mandé Daguerre’s remarkable invention in
1839—comprise a valued collection of snapshots, taken a few years apart, of
the evolving form of the white-light corona. But the high-resolution images
from space—which became available in the early 1970s—provide a continuous
movie of the outer corona that catches every change, fast or slow, including
particularly the release and expansion of huge chunks of coronal plasma, called
coronal mass ejections or CMEs that can directly affect the Earth.

40

The 40 ft-long telescope of California’s Lick Observatory set up near Bombay at Jeur, India to observe the
total eclipse of the Sun on January 22, 1898. The cumbersome, long-focus telescope used a 5-inch lens to
project an image of the Moon 4 inches in diameter and the corona up to 10 inches across, on 18 x 22 inch
glass photographic plates. A series of these were adroitly inserted and removed from the focal plane by
hand, one at a time, in the dark of the eclipsed Sun, at this site within a deep pit dug beneath the striped
tent. The telescope, called “Jumbo,”was taken to fifteen total solar eclipses on six continents from 1893
through 1932, each affording an opportunity of but a few minutes to see the fleeting corona of the Sun.

				
Direct observations of the Sun from space has brought about an equivalent
revolution in our understanding of the inner corona and the chromosphere,
through round the clock observations of the Sun in the invisible ultraviolet
and x-ray light which these regions emit. Since these incoming solar rays are
absorbed in the high atmosphere, we are prevented from seeing the x-ray or
ultraviolet Sun from the ground.
Telescopes in space that are capable of imaging the Sun in x-ray radiation see
the inner corona, more than a million degrees hot, in the light of its own
radiation. The familiar x-ray images employed by your doctor or at the airport
differ in that they are not pictures of the source of x-radiation (in this case a
high-voltage vacuum tube deep within the apparatus) but shadow pictures of
your opaque bones or carry-on luggage, illuminated from behind by a point
source of x-ray radiation.

41

X-ray images of the inner corona offer the great advantage of displaying the
entire visible hemisphere of the Sun, as in a bird’s eye view from above, as
opposed to the more limited edge-on views seen at an eclipse. Moreover,
sophisticated x-ray telescopes in space provide these images in extremely fine
detail, like high-definition television.
Similar observations of the Sun made from space in the extreme-ultraviolet reveal
the upper chromosphere and the transition zone above it in full hemispheric
coverage and in fine detail.
As noted earlier, the temperature of the Sun’s outer atmosphere rises rapidly
with height. With increasing temperature the maximum emission from the
region shifts toward shorter and shorter wavelengths. Radiation from the
10,000° photosphere, for example, peaks in the yellow portion of the visible
spectrum; from the million degree corona it has shifted all the way into the far
ultraviolet and x-ray region.
Thus by a judicious selection of wavelength, including the choice of specific
spectral lines, one can isolate and observe different layers of the solar atmosphere,
from the photosphere through the chromosphere and transition zone into the
low corona: much as adjusting the focus on a pair of binoculars allows one to
observe objects that are closer or farther away.
				

The Sun eclipsed by giant Saturn, seen from the Cassini spacecraft as it circled that cold and distant planet
in 2006. The bright narrow ring that goes fully around the circular Saturn is photospheric light diffracted
from the occulted Sun which lies behind it. Because the Sun is more than nine times farther from Saturn
than from the Earth, it would appear much smaller in Saturn’s sky than in our own; in this view, made
from a relatively short distance from the planet, Saturn’s disk appears far larger than the distant Sun
hidden behind it. The dimly-lit night side of the planet is here illuminated by indirect sunlight reflected
from its many extensive rings, some of which were not found before this image was obtained. Far in the
distance, hardly visible and little larger than the specks of other stars is our own small pale blue planet. It
can be found in the dark space between Saturn’s outermost bright, fuzzy ring and the first, thin dimmer
ring, closer to the latter, and at an angle corresponding to about 9:30 on the face of a clock.

42
Back to Table of Contents

43

A computer-aided depiction of the outward flow of charged atomic particles from the Sun in the solar wind, shown above an actual
image of the hot upper chromosphere, made in the far ultraviolet.

THE SOLAR WIND AND SOLAR
VARIABILITY
The Solar Wind

A consequence of the extremely high temperatures found in the corona is a
corresponding increase in pressure—as happens in a covered pan heated on the
stove. In this case there is no lid, and the heated corona expands freely outward,
pushing against the yielding, lower pressure of the interstellar gas.

This thermally-driven flow of ionized, charged particles—known as plasma—
constitutes an ever present wind that carves out a cavity, called the heliosphere
or realm of the Sun, in the surrounding interstellar medium.
Thus, in addition to heat and light the Sun also releases a continuous flow, called
the solar wind, of atomic particles—protons, neutrons, electrons and ions of
all the solar elements—that expands outward, night and day, in all directions
everywhere. This never-ending flow of coronal plasma is of considerable
significance for the Earth and the other planets. And so it has been for billions
of years.
Notably absent in the solar wind that reaches the Earth, are neutrons: the
fundamental atomic particles with neither positive nor negative charge which
with protons are the building blocks of atomic nuclei. But although neutrons
are present in great abundance on the Sun and are driven off with other particles
in the solar wind, the lifetime of any one of them is so ephemeral—lasting,
typically, no more than a few minutes before it decays—that most of them are
gone by the time they reach the orbit of Venus.
The other particles continue on and on, as the Sun’s principal contribution
to the universe, filling every crevice of the heliosphere—beyond the dimmest
reach of its light beams—with windblown seeds of itself. And they keep on
coming, in seemingly endless supply, as from a magical dandelion. In but one
second of this continual outpouring, the wildly extravagant Sun gives a million
tons of itself away. And in the course of a year, almost 1013 tons.
With little to slow it down, the high-speed solar wind reaches the orbit of the
Earth—after traveling 93 million miles—in but two days; and the slower wind
in about four. At the Earth the average velocity of the streaming solar wind is
about 225 miles per second. The fastest streams that reach the Earth blow at
about 500 miles per second: a thousand times faster than a speeding bullet.
45
Back to Table of Contents

When it arrives at the Earth—however fast it moves—the solar wind is in
terms of mass mostly nothingness, containing about 130 protons in a cubic
inch, compared to the zillions of atoms and molecules in the air we breathe.
And because it is so diffuse, were the fast moving solar wind plasma to blow
against our face it would feel far more like a baby’s breath than the blustery
winds we commonly sense at the surface of the Earth. Even so, the solar wind
plasma at the Earth is about 50 times more densely packed than the ambient
conditions it will eventually meet outside the heliosphere.
Once past the orbit of the Earth, the solar wind plasma continues streaming
outward at constant speed for more than a hundred times our distance from
the Sun: well past the orbits of Mars, Jupiter, distant Saturn, and far away
Uranus, Neptune and little Pluto.
Somewhere well beyond the planets it will reach the cold and darkened limits
of the Sun’s domain: the as yet unexplored boundary that marks the end of
the heliosphere. Here, a long way from home, its initial force is so depleted
by dispersal over so vast a volume of space, that the solar wind loses the upper
hand. The weakened pressure of outward streaming plasma no longer exceeds
that of similar but alien particles arriving from countless other stars. There, at
the heliopause the solar and stellar winds will meet, though because of their
differently oriented magnetic fields, they will seldom truly mix.
				
				
Since it is composed of charged particles, the streaming solar plasma travels
outward from the Sun still bearing the embedded (or “frozen in”) magnetic
signature of the place from which it came, carried with it like a trailing ribbon
still tethered at one end to the Sun. Because the surface magnetic field of the
Sun is organized into discrete patches of either positive (outward-directed)
or negative (inward) polarity, the magnetic earmark of its place of origin is
preserved in each stream.
The solar wind that streams outward in this way from equatorial regions of the
Sun is divided by these differences in polarity into spatially discrete portions
or sectors, which expand in width with distance from the Sun. Although the
plasma flows radially outward, the open field lines that it brings with it—still
attached to the solar surface—are shaped into a curved spiral by the 27-day
rotation of the Sun. As the Sun rotates, sectors of different magnetic polarity
in, above or below the equatorial plane, are swept across the Earth, like a spray
of water from a revolving garden hose, exposing our own magnetosphere—for
a week or more at time—to first one and then the other polarity, in a varying
sequence of slow and fast plasma streams.
46

				
At those times when the direction of the imbedded solar field opposes that of
the Earth, we are more vulnerable to the impacts of incoming solar particles.
Under these conditions, where the onrushing plasma makes contact at the Sunfacing “nose” of the magnetosphere the opposing magnetic lines of force merge
and connect. There, through a process peculiar to highly-conducting plasmas
called magnetic reconnection, magnetic energy from the Sun is efficiently
converted to kinetic energy in the Earth’s magnetosphere.
When this happens, the drawbridge is down and some of the energy of the
onrushing solar plasma makes its way into our own magnetic field, with
consequences that can perturb and disrupt conditions on the surface of
the Earth.
As noted earlier, it takes several days for the solar wind plasma to reach the
Earth. This means that by the time it arrives here, its place of origin on the Sun
has already been carried by solar rotation more than halfway toward the righthand or western edge of the Sun, soon to disappear from our view.
Were we standing on Jupiter—five times our distance from the Sun—the time
between release and arrival would be that much greater. There, by the time the
solar plasma arrives, the shooter has already escaped from sight, around the
western limb of the Sun.

Sources and Characteristics of the Solar Wind

A great deal has been learned about the solar wind and its origins on the Sun

since it was first postulated by Eugene Parker in 1958 and then confirmed, by
direct measurements in space four years later, in 1962. In the forty-odd years
since then, scores of spacecraft have explored and monitored the composition,
velocity, embedded magnetic fields, and temporal fluctuations in the flow,
employing ever more sophisticated sensors.
To accomplish this, solar wind detectors have sampled and monitored
conditions within the heliosphere from well inside the orbit of Mercury to far
beyond that of Pluto.
Ulysses is the first spacecraft to explore the solar system above and below the
plane of the Earth’s orbit: truly the terra incognita of the solar system before
the itinerant spacecraft was launched in early October, 1990. Since that time
Ulysses has traced out successive six-year orbits around the Sun, passing over
47
Back to Table of Contents

both poles of the star to sample and measure the solar wind in these lesser
known regions and to observe from above, the flow of solar plasma from the
Sun’s polar areas.
With the help of Ulysses, in situ measurements of the solar wind combined with
observations from space of the outer corona—where the solar wind is shaped
and directed—have allowed scientists to identify the specific regions in the
corona where solar wind streams of various kinds originate and the sources of
perturbations in the streams that reach the Earth.
				
				

A melded view of solar radiation emanating from the transition region of the outer solar atmosphere
where local temperatures are in the hundred-thousand degree range, and from the million-degree lower
corona, made by combining images of the Sun in the EUV and x-ray regions of the spectrum. Of note is
the association of hotter, brighter active regions with closed magnetic loops; and coronal holes and bright
points in the transition region with depleted portions in the corona above them.

48

The Sun seen in fine detail in the very short wave, x-ray region of the spectrum. Radiation at these
invisible wavelengths originates in the lower corona, where temperatures are measured in millions of
degrees Fahrenheit. The hot spots evident as bright features identify regions of concentrated magnetic
fields: the origins of solar flares and coronal mass ejections, and the foot-points of coronal streamers
which extend beyond what is seen here into the higher corona. Areas of lower electron density that appear
as extended dark areas, known as coronal holes, are the loci of open magnetic fields and the origins of
high speed streams in the solar wind. Within their boundaries, looking much like the lights of cities seen
from space, are highly-concentrated, bright points of coronal x-ray emission.

As noted earlier, two types of solar wind—different in speed, composition and
place of origin—blow outward from the Sun.
The so-called slow-speed solar wind has an average speed of about 200 miles per
second and is made up of ions common to the upper corona of the Sun, from
whence it comes. The sources of the slow wind are coronal streamers, which
are associated with strong magnetic regions in the Sun’s lower atmosphere. In
years of minimal activity they are found only in lower solar latitudes. When the
49
Back to Table of Contents

Sun is more active coronal streamers appear at both low and high latitudes, and
there are more of them. Because of this, slow-speed steams in the solar wind are
more prevalent in years near the maxima of the 11-year sunspot cycle.
SOLAR WIND SPEEDS COMPARED WITH OTHERS
MI/SEC

MI/HR

A Speeding Bullet

0.4

1440

Slow Solar Wind, average speed

200

900,000

High Speed Solar Wind Streams

470

1,700,000

Fastest Solar Wind

560

2,025,000

186,000

670 x 106

Speed of Light

The high-speed streams in the solar wind race outward at speeds two to three
times faster, and their elemental composition is more representative of the
inner corona and transition zone.
Their origins can be traced to extended regions on the Sun where there are few
sunspots and other signs of magnetic activity. When seen in x-ray images of the
inner corona these “quiet” regions appear as dark vacancies or “holes” in the
brighter corona around them: like clearings in an aerial view of a forest, which
in this case is made up of closely packed coronal loops; or as bald spots at the
poles of the Sun. In the outer corona they appear as regions of very low density,
largely devoid of coronal streamers.
Within these extended zones of solar inactivity, magnetic lines of force extend
radially outward like blades of tall grass above the surface of the Sun, defining
open magnetic field lines that are tied to the star only at their base. The closed
field lines which connect regions of opposite magnetic polarity in solar active
regions restrict the release of hot plasma from the corona, producing the lowspeed streams in the solar wind. In contrast, areas of open magnetic field lines
present little opposition, allowing solar plasma in the transition zone and
corona to escape the Sun at much higher velocities.
In years around minima of the 11-year sunspot cycle, extensive coronal holes
cover the polar caps of the Sun, extending downward in places to lower solar
latitudes.

Solar Variability

All solar fluctuations that disturb the Earth can be traced to the effects of the
strong solar magnetic fields that thread their way through the photospheric
50

surface and into the middle and outer atmosphere of the star. Indeed, were the
Sun to rid itself of all magnetic fields, it would hardly vary at all: leaving but a
big light bulb in the sky, slowly burning itself out.
Solar activity is a general term used to describe the nature and extent of solar
magnetic fields. The venerable and most common index by which it is described
relates to the number of sunspots visible on the disk of the Sun at any time.
Since 1848, astronomers around the world have for this purpose employed a
universal but arbitrarily-defined index, called the Wolf sunspot number, or
more commonly, sunspot number, which endeavors to correct for unavoidable
differences in solar telescopes, observing conditions and human observers.
The sunspot number defined in this way is calculated daily, but the most
common denomination—the $20 bill of sunspot numbers—is the annuallyaveraged value. When these are displayed as a time-series graph, a cyclic rise
and fall is readily apparent, defining an elastic “cycle” that varies in length from
nine to thirteen years, with a mean value of about eleven.
Individual cycles, which by convention run from one sunspot minimum to the
next, are identified by number, beginning arbitrarily with the cycle (#1) which
extended from 1756—when Thomas Jefferson was a boy—until 1766. The
most recently completed cycle, #23, which reached a maximum in 2001and a
minimum in 2007, was as always, immediately followed (The King is dead. Long
live the King!) by cycle #24 which should maximize in about 2013. Through
history, the 11-year sunspot cycle has enjoyed an almost hypnotic appeal to
professionals and amateurs alike, scrutinized chiefly for with what it might be
correlated. Needless to say, its statistical examination is a finely-plowed field.
The nearly random variation in the lengths and amplitudes of cycles, and the
existence of periods when for decades the number of sunspots falls to very low
levels, tell of an internal mechanism within the Sun that is hardly the precise
ticking of a clock. If your electrocardiogram looked anything like the graph of
annual sunspot numbers, your doctor would have a very worried look on his
or her face.
The underlying 11-year cycle is hardly detectable in weekly or even monthly
averages, where it is more than masked by short-term variations of greater
magnitude. These are imposed in large part by the Sun’s rotation, which
continually brings different faces of the Sun into view, and by the birth,
evolution and fading away of different active regions.
				
				
51
Back to Table of Contents

All of these variations have been known for a long time, as has the revealing
fact that sunspots doggedly adhere to fixed rules of placement and magnetic
polarity, following the same time-worn patterns and well-worn tracks, from
cycle to cycle and century to century.
Sunspots generally appear in pairs, oriented along roughly E-W lines: a leader
spot of one magnetic polarity, followed by another, just behind it, of the
opposite sign. Sunspots are also concentrated at any time within two bands
of solar latitude, one in the northern and one in the southern hemisphere,
each of which migrates toward the equator in the course of the 11-year cycle.
The magnetic polarities of the leading and the following spot are of opposite
sign in the two hemispheres, and this, too, switches on cue, at the start of each
new 11-year cycle. The same is true of the two polar regions of the Sun, which
reverse polarity with each new 11-year cycle.
Thus the time to complete one full solar magnetic cycle—from one polarity to
the other, and back again—is about 22 years: which is fast indeed for an object
so large and massive. In comparison, the magnetic field rooted in the molten
core of our little solid Earth has reversed its polarity but three times in the
last five million years, at highly irregular intervals, and through processes that
happen far more slowly and far from synchronously at the two poles. How does
the Sun make its switch so fast, and where and how does it happen?

Why the Sun Varies

T

he answers lie in the fact that the Sun has no long-lasting imbedded field like
that of the Earth. What we observe on the surface of the star is a conglomeration

200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
1
2
3
4
5
0
1610 1620 1630 1640 1650 1660 1670 1680 1690 1700 1710 1720 1730 1740 1750 1760 1770 1780 1790 1800 181
The observed year-to-year variation in the sunspot number (a measure of the number of dark spots and
sunspot groups seen on the white-light Sun, corrected for observing conditions) spanning the period
from the earliest use of the telescope through 2007. Shown for each year is the mean annual value of daily
numbers, which vary considerably from day-to-day.

52

of superficial fields that are only skin deep: the transitory manifestations of
magnetic fields that are continuously generated deeper within the star and
carried upward to the radiating surface.
The so-called solar dynamo, which converts polar to toroidal magnetic fields
within the Sun, operates on the same basic principle as the huge dynamos
in public power plants that convert kinetic energy into electric currents
and magnetic fields. But to fit what we know of the ritualistic behavior of
sunspots, the solar mechanism must also orient, organize and then release the
newly-created magnetic fields in ways that keep them in line and in step, like
soldiers on the march, in cadence with non-stop drum beats of eleven and
twenty-two years.
Some questions remain, but we now think we know what fuels the solar
dynamo, how it operates, and where within the Sun it does its work, initiating
a chain of events that ultimately perturbs conditions on our planet and the
daily lives of all who live here.
Deep within the hot interior of the Sun, the motions of electrically-charged
atomic particles within the solar plasma continually generate incipient magnetic
fields, much as the motions of molten metal deep within the Earth give birth to
the Earth’s magnetic field. But there the similarity ends, for conditions within
the Sun and the solar plasma are far more fluid, turbulent and transitory.
When upwardly mobile magnetic fields generated within the Sun arrive at the
boundary that separates the spherical, radiative core of the innermost Sun from
the deep shell of convection that lies above it they enter a different world.

200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
22
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
23
0
10 1820 1830 1840 1850 1860 1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
Next Maximum Expected in 2013
Evident is the well-known cycle of about eleven years, and obvious trends in the longer-term, overall level
of solar activity. The period of suppressed activity between the mid-1600s and about 1715 is known as
the Maunder Minimum, a feature that is also evident in other records of solar behavior.

53
Back to Table of Contents

There in a thin transition layer called the tachocline they come in contact with
the strong shearing force that arises from the different rates of rotation of these
two internal regions: the one a rigidly rotating ball (the radiative core) and
the other an independently-rotating spherical shell (the convection zone) that
spins at a different speed just above it. The shearing force at this interface
flips and re-orients what were originally N-S oriented fields into those that
are organized in the E-W direction, creating closed, magnetic hoop-like rings
within the convective zone which lie in planes parallel to the Sun’s equator.

A magnetic picture or magnetogram of the solar photosphere made (from 93 million miles away!) on
October 28, 2003 showing regions of strong magnetic polarity. White portrays what is conventionally
called positive (or north) polarity, black negative (or south) polarity. As we see here, magnetic regions (which
correspond to regions of sunspots and other manifestations of concentrated solar activity) are made up of
adjacent parts of opposing magnetic polarity which are confined within two distinct belts of solar latitude.

Magnetic pressure pushes these toroidal rings of magnetically-organized
plasma upward and outward through the convective zone, to rise like smoke
54

rings, one after another, some into the northern hemisphere of the Sun, others
into the southern.
When a portion of any one of these buoyant rising rings of bundled magnetic
lines of force comes in contact with the overlying photosphere, the toroid is at
that point severed and pulled apart, exposing two ends of opposite magnetic
polarity, which emerge as oppositely-polarized regions of surface magnetic
activity and most visibly as sunspots.
The number of toroidal magnetic rings released at the base of the convection
zone varies in a cycle of about eleven years. Due to the way they were created,
the configuration of the magnetic lines of force in rings that approach the
photospheric surface in the northern hemisphere of the Sun is opposite in
any 11-year cycle to those that take the southern route. The result is a 22-year
cycle in the characteristics of magnetic activity in pairs of sunspots in either
hemisphere. In one 11-year cycle, as at the poles of the Sun, the polarity of the
eastward (or leading) spot of a pair is positive and the westward (following)
spot is negative in one hemisphere, and opposite in the other. In the next cycle
these conditions are reversed.
Numerical models based on a theoretical solar dynamo of this kind can be made
to fit at least some of the observed characteristics of the eleven and twenty-two
year variations in sunspots and magnetic activity on the Sun. These theoretical
and potentially rewarding efforts to build and try numerical models of the solar
dynamo have benefited immensely from the recent findings about the interior
of the Sun that have come from helioseismology.
The ability to predict, accurately, the detailed behavior of solar magnetic activity
years in advance—like that of accurately predicting earthquakes or foretelling
climate on that scale of time—is, in terms of practical importance, the Holy
Grail of solar physics.

Ten years in the life of the Sun, spanning most of solar cycle 23, as it progressed from solar maximum to
minimum conditions and back to maximum (lower left) again, seen as a collage of ten full-disk images of
the lower corona made in x-ray radiation. Of note is the prevalence of activity and the relatively few years
when our Sun might be described as “quiet”.

55
Back to Table of Contents

Progress of the Sun through the ten-year period encompassed above, in this case as recorded in
corresponding full-disk solar magnetograms that portray magnetic fields of positive and negative magnetic
polarity on the surface of the Sun. The two polarities are depicted as either white or blue, with intensity
proportionate to magnetic field strength.

Short- and Long-Term Changes in Solar Activity

Recent attempts to do this, based on dynamo models, have ventured testable

predictions of when the present 11-year solar cycle (#24) would start and end
and how strong it will be. Time will tell, but if proven correct, this could mark
a major turning point in our ability to foresee and prepare for many of the
societal impacts of year-to-year solar changes.
More difficult to reproduce in dynamo models are the slower and possibly
systematic changes, spanning decades to centuries, which are evident in the
long record of historically-observed sunspots and in indirectly-obtained proxy
data that cover much longer spans of time.
Through the first half of the 20th century, for example, the total number of
sunspots observed in successive 11-year cycles steadily increased, in the manner
of an amplitude-modulated radio wave, as though the Sun were entering a
longer period of higher and higher solar magnetic activity. As well it may have
done, peaking, perhaps with cycle #19, as we see in the graph of annual mean
sunspot numbers at the bottom of pages 52 and 53.
There have also been extended periods in which the peak amplitudes of
successive 11-year cycles were consistently and severely depressed. An example
56

is the period of several decades at the turn of the 18th century, when for
several 11-year cycles the number of sunspots dropped to less than half what
it was both before and after, and the cycle lengths were unusually irregular. A
pronounced drop of a similar amount characterized annual sunspot numbers
in three successive decades at the turn of the 20th century.
Most pronounced in the historical, telescopic record of sunspot numbers was
the 70-year period from about 1645 to 1715, during which time the total
number of sunspots that were observed and recorded was not that much greater
than what are seen in a single year of high solar activity today.
This latter episode was later named the Maunder Minimum, and one that
preceded it, running from about 1450 to 1540, the Spörer Minimum, after E.
Walter Maunder and Gustav Spörer, the British and German astronomers who
in the late 1880s called attention to the first of these curious anomalies. They
were far from the first nor the last to do so, however. The dearth of sunspots
between about 1645 and 1715 (which happened to coincide precisely with
the reign of Louis XIV, the Sun King) had in fact been repeatedly pointed out
during the years when it was happening. But it had been largely forgotten
and probably discounted following Schwabe’s remarkable discovery in 1843
of a 10- or 11-year cycle in annual mean sunspot numbers, which seemed to
describe the Sun more nicely as a highly regular and strictly periodic star.
The Maunder Minimum might be considered an artifact in the historical record
of telescopically-observed spots on the Sun, were it not that it also appears as
a time of dramatic drop in the number of reported aurorae, and as a similar
gap in naked-eye sunspots documented in those years by court astronomers of
the contemporaneous Qing dynasty in China. More important, the Maunder
and Spörer Minima stand out as dominant features of the tree-ring record of
carbon-14, following seven other similar events—each 50 to 150 years long—
that preceded them in time, and as similar features in the beryllium-10 record
taken from polar ice cores.

Solar Explosions and Eruptions

Far and away the most dynamic and spectacular changes that occur on the
Sun are the short term eruptions and explosions in its outer atmosphere that
come and go in but a few minutes, a few hours, or at most a day. These include
intensely bright, explosive flares; the eruptions and annihilations of towering
solar prominences in the chromosphere and corona; and the expulsion of whole
parts of the corona in the form of coronal mass ejections, or CMEs.

The occurrence of these three distinctive types of violent and often-related
events is very much affected by the phase and magnitude of the Sun’s 1157
Back to Table of Contents

year solar of activity. All involve the sudden release or exchange of energy, in
massive amounts; and all, not surprisingly, involve the interactions of strong
magnetic fields.
In years when the Sun is most active small flares occur somewhere on its surface
every minute, and CMEs of one size or another are expelled from the corona
at an average rate of three or four per day. In years of minimum activity these
numbers fall dramatically.

Explosive Solar Flares

Solar flares appear as sudden and intense brightenings in highly-localized

regions on the surface of the Sun: as though a lighted match had been dropped
into a puddle of spilled gasoline. The initial and brightest part of the ensuing
whoosh of light usually lasts but a few minutes, and the sudden event will run
its course, on average, in less than half an hour. Some of the effects on the Earth
are almost immediate. Others last for several days.
In the largest solar flares, the amount of energy released on the Sun from a
relatively small region and in so short a span of time is far beyond all earthly
experience.

				
The asteroid that struck the Earth about 65 million years ago—marking the
transition between the Cretaceous and Tertiary periods of geologic history—
dealt, without doubt, one of the hardest blows our little planet has ever felt:
so momentous that that single event is believed responsible by many scientists
for the contemporaneous extinction of the dinosaurs. To produce this
extraordinary impact, the asteroid must have been at least five and one-half
miles in diameter, as dense as cast iron, and traveling at the moment of impact
at about 45,000 miles per hour. Nevertheless, the energy released in that Earthchanging collision was still about 100 times less than what is released on the
Sun in a single, very large flare.
As another comparison: The energy released in August of 1945 in the atomic
bombs detonated over either Hiroshima or Nagasaki was equivalent to about
20,000 tons of TNT. A single hydrogen bomb—the next step toward destructive
awfulness—can unleash the explosive power of several thousand atomic bombs.
In contrast, the energy released in a large solar flare—of the sort that exploded
on the limb of the Sun on Halloween in 2003—was equivalent to several
hundred hydrogen bombs detonated all at once at the same place. The internal
temperature sustained for a few minutes within the explosion can be for any
58

flare as high as that in the innermost core of the Sun: more than 20 million
degrees Fahrenheit. The area on the Sun in which a large flare is concentrated,
though a miniscule fraction of the total solar surface, can equal the surface area
of half of the Earth, with a vertical extent of about 6000 miles: nearly as high
as the Earth is wide.
				
Most solar flares seem to be initiated in magnetic loops of the lower corona,
and most of the immediate, ensuing action takes place above the photosphere
in the chromosphere and transition zone. In these two intervening regions
of the solar atmosphere the sudden and overwhelming impulse of energy—
downward from the corona—triggers immediate responses in the form of
bursts of radiation and particle acceleration.
Major flares occur only in magnetically-active regions on the Sun: in the
distinctive and often snarled and twisted magnetic fields of complex sunspot
groups. Their precise points of origin are most often found in places of
magnetic confrontation and conflict where oppositely-directed field lines come
into contact with each other. When this happens, the magnetic field lines can
be severed, reconnected or re-formed, through processes that convert some of
their huge store of magnetic energy into heat, radiation, and the acceleration
of atomic particles in the local plasma.
The tremendous amount of radiative energy that flares emit is distributed over
the full breadth of the electromagnetic spectrum: from gamma-rays to x-rays
to ultraviolet to visible to infrared and radio waves. When a large flare occurs
on the Sun it can be detected by instruments ranging from x-ray telescopes to
radio receivers.
The high-energy x-rays, gamma rays, and far ultraviolet radiation from this
blast of converted energy are sprayed out from the source of the flare in all
directions, and strike the upper atmosphere of the Earth with no warning at
all, since they too, travel at the speed of light. The heavier atomic particles that
receive the most energy can be driven from the Sun at velocities of up to almost
half the speed of light, to arrive at the Earth in but fifteen minutes, which is but
seven minutes after the flare is first seen.
Slower particles of lower energy will strike the Earth within hours to a few days
later, but they can affect the Earth in only minor ways, compared to the potential
damage done by the more energetic solar protons in the initial eruption or the
effects of CMEs. Radiation and heavy particles from large flares pose a direct
hazard to exposed spacecraft and astronauts whose travels take them beyond
the protective shields of the magnetosphere and upper atmosphere.
59
Back to Table of Contents

Three images showing the eruption of an extremely energetic solar flare at the limb of the Sun, taken
at the same time on November 4, 2003. Shown, from bottom to top, are the white-light photosphere;
the upper chromosphere (seen in the extreme ultra-violet); and in x-ray wavelengths, the lower corona
(from which most of the flare’s prodigious store of energy was released.) The associated magnetic region is
visible in the first of these as a cluster of large sunspots being carried over the east edge of the Sun by solar
rotation. The actual size of the associated active region is revealed in the two higher images as an extensive
group of very large magnetically-active regions.

60

Solar Prominences and Filaments

S

ome of the magnetic lines of force that reach upward from regions
of particularly strong sunspot magnetic fields are able to carry cooler
chromospheric material with them into the hotter corona, where it is
magnetically insulated and held aloft for a time, in the form of extended
clouds called solar filaments.
When seen in visible light at the edge, or limb of the solar disk, as in a
coronagraph or when the Sun is eclipsed by the Moon, these extensions of

The active Sun seen in the EUV on February 23, 2004, displaying hotter, magnetically-active regions
and cooler, darker filaments. Dark filaments of this kind, were they seen at the edge of the Sun, would
appear as long, elevated clouds extending above and beyond its curved limb. They can persist for several
weeks and are composed of hot chromospheric material held aloft in the less dense and far hotter corona
by arched magnetic field lines, defying the force of solar gravity and the fundamental principle of heat
transfer. Were it straightened out, the sickle-shaped, longest of these would cover nearly four times the
distance that separates the Earth from the Moon.

61
Back to Table of Contents

Solar rotation carries an active region into view on the east limb of the Sun, revealing the initial lift-off of
a newly-spawned coronal mass ejection. In time, as it speeds outward into interplanetary space, the CME
will expand to a size larger than the Sun itself. This view of the chromosphere, made in the far ultraviolet
light of ionized helium, shows the solar plasma at a temperature of about 100,000° Fahrenheit, ten times
hotter than the spotted, white-light photosphere which lies just beneath it.

chromospheric material, aptly called solar protuberances or prominences,
appear in varied sizes and graceful shapes—sometimes resembling the handle
of a Sun-sized teacup. Under these circumstances they stand out against the
dim white of the corona as brighter features which are distinctively red: the
pure color of light emitted by excited hydrogen atoms.
When we look at the disk of the Sun in the red light of hydrogen in the
chromosphere, the same prominences—now seen from above—appear not
brighter but darker than the surrounding disk, as worm-like dark filaments
that are both cooler and denser than most of the other material around them.
62

When seen from this perspective it is obvious that the often sinuous forms
of solar filaments follow the course of the neutral dividing line that separates
regions of opposite magnetic polarity in solar active regions: like a referee who
with arms extended, attempts to hold opposing magnetic pugilists apart.
When the attempt fails and the two oppositely-charged regions come in
contact, the disruption and reconnection of the magnetic lines of force that
had suspended and nourished the great mass of chromospheric plasma are
suddenly unleashed, with the same force and some of the same effects as an
explosive solar flare. When this happens, the filament can be torn loose from its
magnetic roots at the solar surface and flung outward, bodily, from the Sun.
A rising solar filament, driven upward and outward at speeds of several hundred
to a thousand miles per second is but one manifestation of a more extensive
magnetic disturbance in the corona which expels much larger loops of coronal
plasma at far greater speeds. In the course of these larger-scale magnetic
reconfigurations, entire streamers can be torn from the corona and thrown
outward into space, like petals pulled from a daisy. These immense coronal
mass ejections (or CMEs) expand as they proceed outward from the Sun, and
soon exceed by far the size of the star that gave them birth and sent them on
their way.
Filaments or prominences are common features on the Sun at times of increased
solar activity. Those known as active prominences, which straddle a region of
magnetic activity with feet in regions of opposite magnetic polarity, can erupt
within a few days of their formation. Another class, found in quieter and less
rowdy places on the surface of the Sun, can literally hang around for months at
a time, peacefully and with little change, until they slowly fade away.
They can also grow into immense structures that seem wholly out of scale
when compared with anything else on the surface of the Sun: truly gargantuan
features when we see them extended outward above the limb. Or on the disk,
where as dark filaments they look a lot like segments of the Great Wall that
snakes its way across the northern hills of China.
The largest of all are the long-lived and relatively inactive quiescent prominences
that can tower tens of thousands of miles above the surface of the Sun, and
extend for hundreds of thousands of miles. Were one of these large quiescent
prominences somehow suspended in the space between the Earth and the
Moon, it would span most of the distance that keeps us apart: a red bridge of
many arches in the sky, nearly 200 thousand miles long.

63
Back to Table of Contents

The eruption of a looped solar filament that is rooted in a magnetically-active region near the apparent
edge, or limb, of the Sun. The image, from the TRACE spacecraft, was made in the light of the (invisible)
extreme ultraviolet spectrum, emitted from regions of the solar atmosphere where temperatures exceed
more than two million degrees Fahrenheit.

Coronal Mass Ejections

I

f sunspot magnetic fields are the gunpowder, flares the muskets and
prominences the horse-drawn cannons in the venerable solar armory, coronal
mass ejections or CMEs—which came to be recognized but thirty years ago—
are truly the heavy artillery. Indeed, interplanetary CMEs are the primary
64

drivers of almost all space weather disruptions, including highly accelerated
plasma streams and most major geomagnetic storms, with potential impacts
on a wide range of human activities.
CMEs are the product of impulsive changes in the corona, in which entire
segments of the outer corona are driven outward from the Sun and ejected into
the solar wind stream. They originate in regions of closed magnetic field, most
often from the coronal streamers that extend outward from the disk of the Sun
like the petals of a flower.
The bulbous, helmet-shaped base of a coronal streamer is formed by closed
magnetic fields that are strong enough to contain the coronal plasma at this
level and keep it from expanding and escaping as solar wind. This is not the
case, however, for the outer extensions of streamers. There the strength of the
coronal magnetic field, which decreases with height, can no longer contain the
coronal expansion. At this level—between about 0.5 and 1 solar radius above
the limb—the coronal plasma is able to stream freely outward from the Sun,
producing the typical tapered form of extended coronal streamers.
It is largely the inner parts of a streamer, however, that are expelled from the
Sun as CMEs. When the magnetic bindings that contain the base of a coronal
streamer are disturbed or catastrophically broken, the plasma that was confined
within it—often an entire coronal streamer—is flung outward as from a loaded
spring. As it moves outward, the outer edges of the expanding CME often
appear as a closed loop, still attached at the Sun, and indeed, few CMEs ever
completely sever their magnetic connection to the star.
There is no general agreement as to what initiates the release of a CME, although
stressed magnetic fields are undoubtedly involved. One possible explanation
holds that when the two foot-points of a large coronal magnetic loop—one
rooted in a magnetic region of positive polarity and the other in the opposite
sign—are moved relative to each other by the shearing action of differential
rotation at the surface of the Sun, the towering loops that form the base of an
overlying coronal streamer are directly affected. A likely result is a twisting of
the loop that can be relieved only by dynamic realignment and readjustment,
with the explosive release of some of its vast store of magnetic energy.
It is also clear that CMEs are a significant player in the evolution of the corona
from minimum to maximum levels of solar activity, and that the release of a
CME is quite likely a stress reliever that enables the outer solar atmosphere to
reconfigure itself in response to underlying changes in the solar magnetic field.
				
65
Back to Table of Contents

CMEs are expelled from the Sun at a wide range of speeds: the slowest cover
a few tens of miles in a second, and the fastest move a hundred times faster.
At these speeds slower CMEs will travel a distance equal to the radius of the
Sun (430,000 miles) in but a few hours, and the fastest in but a few seconds.
It is rare that one can distinguish the movement of anything on the Sun as
it happens because the Sun is so far away. But CMEs are so large and fastmoving that through a coronagraph—where most of them are detected and
tracked—one can follow the initial outward progress and expansion of many
of them in real time.
Coronal streamers that give rise to CMEs often become more luminous a day
or so before the eruption, as though signaling their own impending demise.
And in time, moreover, a replacement streamer may re-form in the vacant
space where the original was torn away. What has happened, in any case, is a
violent restructuring of a large part of the solar corona, an expulsion of a piece
of it which expands like a balloon as it moves outward, and the release of a large
amount of energy into interplanetary space.
Carried off with the expanding plasma cloud is the embedded magnetic field
that gave it form and structure. Any prominence that lies within the bulbous
base of the same streamer is also often torn away. These are commonly uprooted
and carried away from the Sun with the CME, initially as a cooler and denser
arch of chromospheric material enclosed within the expanding coronal loop,
though driven outward at a somewhat slower speed.
Often solar flares are also seen in the same active region on the Sun, at about
the same time or shortly after the eruption of a CME. But the flares and
eruptive prominences that are so often associated with coronal mass ejections
do not necessarily provoke the CME, or the other way around. They are, rather,
different consequences of the same large-scale, magnetic event.
				
Although some move faster, the average speed of a CME through the outer
corona—about 250 miles per second—is still far short of the velocity needed
in the corona to overcome the immense restraining pull of solar gravity.
Yet they escape. This and the fact that none of them fall back to the solar
surface—in the manner of arrows shot into the air—tell us that other forces
within the corona continue to accelerate a CME, once launched, to send it
ever faster on its way.
CMEs could be compared to tornadoes, hurricanes and tsunamis on the Earth
were these coronal expulsions less frequent and commonplace. As noted earlier,
66

The formation and release of a mass ejection (CME) in August of 1980, near the maximum of solar cycle
#21, showing its destructive impact on the coronal streamer of which it was a part. The sequence of six
images (arranged from bottom left to top left, then bottom right to top right, cover a period of 3½ hours,
with most of the major changes in the half hour captured in images 2, 3, 4 and 5, which are each about
ten minutes apart. The loop-like CME seen in the last image, with a mass of about ten million tons, will
speed outward from the Sun into interplanetary space at a million miles per hour or more. CME’s were not
discovered until the early 1970s, when solar coronagraphs capable of seeing them were put into space.

67
Back to Table of Contents

how often they occur generally follows the phase of the 11-year sunspot cycle.
On average there are between three and four CMEs per day when the Sun is near
the peak of its activity cycle. At times of minimum activity, the number falls to
about one every ten days. Thus, when averaged over the entire cycle, the Sun
produces on average of about one per day, like a hen laying (very large) eggs.
In the process of this continuing celestial workout, the Sun sheds a lot of
pounds, whether reckoned per month, per week, or per day; and unlike us,
none of the lost weight will ever be regained. A typical CME carries off a
thousand million, i.e., a billion tons of coronal plasma. In one month, at the
average rate of one CME per day, the Sun loses an amount of mass equivalent
to the weight of all the water in the five Great Lakes, one of which is the largest
fresh water lake in the world.

The expulsion of a CME from the Sun, made up of an entire coronal streamer and the chromospheric
prominence that lay within it. The diffuse remains of the streamer (at about 11 o’clock) is, like the rest
of the white-light corona, composed of solar electrons illuminated by sunlight from the here-hidden
photosphere. The ejected prominence that trails behind and slightly to the left of the coronal mass retains
its original looped shape, though now in greatly expanded form. The size of the solar disk, dwarfed by
what it has sent into space, is shown as a white circle in the center of the larger circular region of the inner
corona that is blocked by the coronagraph.

68

But the corona isn’t made of water, and the Sun is not the Earth but an object
that is 330 thousand times more massive. Had the Sun sent out not one but
a hundred CMEs each day since it first became a star, 4.6 billion years ago,
its total mass would by now have been reduced by about .01%: a fractional
change which for a 210 lb. dieter would correspond to a total weight loss (after
all this time and all that effort!!) of less than a third of an ounce.
PRINCIPAL MANIFESTATIONS OF SOLAR ACTIVITY
FEATURE

DESCRIPTION

LIFETIME

EFFECT ON THE EARTH

Sunspots

Dark spots that appear
on the white-light disk
of the Sun, each the
locus of strong and
concentrated
magnetic flux

Days to a
month
or more

Incremental
reduction in the
total solar radiation
received at the Earth

Plages

Bright patches in the
photosphere and
chromosphere, most
often in association
with sunspots

Days to a
month or
more

Incremental increase
in the total solar
radiation received
at the Earth

Flares

Sudden, explosive
brightenings in
magnetically-active
regions in the
chromosphere and
corona, accompanied
by the release of
highly energetic
electromagnetic
radiation and atomic
particles

A few
minutes to
an hour
or more

Drastic, transitory
increase in the flux of
x-ray and extremeultraviolet radiation with
effects on the upper
atmosphere; release of
highly energetic protons,
posing hazards to manned
and unmanned spacecraft
and jet aircraft at high
latitudes

CMEs

Expulsions of
large segments of
the outer corona,
often becoming
larger than the Sun
itself, into
inter-planetary
space

Days to
weeks

Acceleration of
atomic particles in
the solar wind,
with concomitant
impacts on the
magnetosphere and
upper atmosphere

69
Back to Table of Contents

An artist’s depiction of the environment of the spherical Earth, at center, seen against a background of other stars, as it would appear
from space were we granted the gift of magnetic vision. The source of the nearly symmetric pattern of magnetic lines of force attached
at the Earth is the internal magnet that exists within the planet’s dynamic metallic inner core. Several thousand miles above the buried
magnet, lines of force of opposite polarity emerge from regions near the Earth’s rotational poles. They trace out the familiar pattern
of a simple bar magnet, distorted by the force of the solar wind which compresses it on the Sun-facing (upper left) side. Trapped
within the confines of the inner, stronger lines of magnetic force are charged atomic particles—electrons and protons—which are
concentrated in two concentric radiation belts, the innermost of which is portrayed here in cross section, like a sliced doughnut.

THE NEAR-EARTH
ENVIRONMENT
A Protected Planet

W

e live, by chance or otherwise, on a highly protected planet. Were it not
for the two natural barriers that stand between the Sun and the surface of the
Earth, life itself would soon disappear.
These essential shields—the magnetosphere and just beneath it, the gaseous
atmosphere of the Earth—protect us from the full fury of the highly variable
star with which we live, and from even more energetic atomic particles that
arrive from distant cosmic explosions.
The first of these, the magnetosphere, is an invisible cage built of magnetic lines
of force that deflect the vast majority but not all of the high energy electrons,
protons, and ions that continually assault the Earth on their way outward from
the Sun. But this over-arching shell offers no defense at all against a second and
equally persistent hazard: the onrushing streams of highly energetic ultraviolet,
x-ray and gamma ray photons that pour outward from the Sun and against the
Earth, day after day.
Atoms and molecules of oxygen and nitrogen in the air provide this second
shield by filtering the electromagnetic radiation that enters the top of the
atmosphere. In this wavelength-selective process, solar heat and visible radiation
are allowed to pass through the atmosphere from top to bottom to warm and
illuminate the surface of the Earth, while solar gamma rays, x-rays, and the
most damaging ultraviolet rays are absorbed and thus removed.
The same atoms and molecules of air also serve as a second line of defense
against high energy atomic particles, including those of neutral charge.
The incoming solar or cosmic particles that make their way through the
magnetosphere and into the atmosphere lose much of their energy in the
course of collisions with atoms and molecules of air, and in the process are
de-fused: just as the same all-protective blanket of air shields the surface of
the planet from the force of all but the largest meteors that enter the top of
the atmosphere. It also keeps us comfortable by holding in much of the heat
released from the Sun-warmed surface of the Earth.
71
Back to Table of Contents

Beyond the outer edges of these two trusted bulwarks—the atmosphere and
the magnetosphere—lies a world that is far more hazardous: the airless, lifeless
heliosphere, or realm of the Sun, that reaches outward from the star in all
directions for ten billion miles and more.

The Air Above Us

Ulf Merbold, a German astronaut, may have best described the Earth’s

atmosphere when late in 1983, from the vantage point of space, he first looked
out at it from above, through a window in the Columbia space shuttle:
“For the first time in my life I saw the horizon as a curved line. It was
accentuated by a thin seam of dark blue light—our atmosphere. Obviously,
this was not the ocean of air I had been told it was so many times… I was
terrified by its fragile appearance.”
The blue blanket of air that warms and protects the planet is indeed fragile
and surprisingly thin, given all that it must do. The atmosphere of the Earth
extends above the surface in the form of air to a nominal height of roughly 100
miles, but not as a uniform or homogeneous layer. More than half of the air
that it contains is found within the first ten miles of that distance, and when
one is less than a third of the way to the top so much of the molecular air is
gone that the daytime sky is no longer blue, but black.
Moreover, along the way, with ever-increasing height above the ground,
the atmosphere undergoes major transformations: not only in density and
temperature, but in composition and function as well. Were it a country,
the atmosphere would be described by geographers and demographers as a
loose federation of vertically-separated ethnic regions, each quite different in
population density, demographic characteristics, prevailing climate, and the
work that gets done there.

Changes on the Way to the Top

O

bvious to anyone who has ascended a mountain is the change in the density
of the atmosphere with altitude: how much lighter, thinner and headache-ier
the air becomes the higher up we go.
In Denver, but a mile above the sea, the density of the air—and hence the
amount of oxygen we take in with each deep breath—has already dropped by
15% when compared with air in Boston or San Francisco. On top of Pike’s
Peak, at 14,100 ft, the oxygen in each breath has been reduced by more than
72

a third from sea-level values, and atop Mt. Everest—at 29,035 ft, the highest
point on the planet—by more than half.

The flash of the rising Sun as it appeared in space, above the darkened night-side of the Earth,
illuminating the thin, protective shell of our atmosphere (curved blue line). At lower left we see the first
glint of the Sun on the vertical stabilizer and other parts of the Space Shuttle Discovery, from which
this picture was made. Due to the speed of its orbit around the Earth, astronauts witness a sunrise and
sunset every 90 minutes.

So much of the Earth’s atmosphere is so vacuous, diaphanous and diffuse that
were we to compress its 100 miles or so of thickness into a layer of uniform
density, like the air near the surface, we would be left with a sky but five miles
high with no air to breathe above it. In squeezing the atmosphere down in this
way, the peaks of at least a dozen Himalayan mountains—no longer covered
with air—would protrude above it like a chain of islands in mid-ocean.
The temperature of the ever-thinning atmosphere also changes with altitude,
but neither uniformly nor always in the same direction. A concentrated layer
of ozone in the middle atmosphere, created there by the effects of incoming
73
Back to Table of Contents

solar ultraviolet radiation on molecules of oxygen, alters what would be a much
simpler profile of temperature vs height.
Were the ozone layer not there we would expect the temperature of the air to
cool with height above the warm surface of the planet. At some level part way
to the top, as the air becomes thinner and thinner, the cooling trend would
slow and reverse direction, now heating up with height, due to the absorption
of solar short-wave radiation in the upper atmosphere. In that simplest case
the profile of temperature versus height above the surface of the Earth would
trace out a smooth curve that looked like a big “C” when plotted with warmer
temperatures to the right and colder temperatures to the left.
But the stratospheric ozone layer alters this simplified relationship by adding heat
to the middle atmosphere, which interrupts the expected cooling with height at
an altitude of about ten miles above the surface and reverses its direction. What
is then a warming with height continues through a run of another 20 miles
in altitude, where, at the end of the ozone layer, the atmosphere reverts once
more to its initial trend of cooling with height. Much higher, as we approach
the top of the atmosphere the cooling trend slows to a stop and reverses itself
one more time, now heating monotonically with height, in this case driven by
the absorption of solar EUV and x-ray radiation.
With these forced reversals from cooling-with-height to warming, to cooling,
and back to warming again the expected “C” shape of the temperature profile
of the atmosphere (with a single temperature minimum about one-third of the
way to the top) is bent into a more complex curve (shown in red on the following
image), with minima at about fifteen and eighty miles above the surface and a
maximum in between. These diversions and excursions divide the atmosphere,
in terms of temperature and function—into five distinct horizontal layers: the
troposphere, stratosphere, mesosphere, thermosphere, and exosphere.
				
But in speaking of the “temperature” of the atmosphere we refer not to the
effective temperature which you and I would feel were we to ascend in a balloon
gondola through these higher regions of the atmosphere, but the physicallydefined kinetic temperature: a measure of the speed of random motions of
atoms and molecules of air, no matter how thin or densely packed they are.
How much a person would feel these random movements of the submicroscopic constituents of air—moving slower at lower temperatures, faster
at higher—depends almost entirely upon the density of the air, which in
the Earth’s atmosphere decreases markedly with altitude. Thus an astronaut
74

90

140
130

Aurora

80

120
THERMOSPHERE

110
100

Height (km)

80
Tem
p

70
Meteor

erat

ure

50

Mesopause

50

MESOSPHERE

40

Stratopause

30

STRATOSPHERE

20

Height (miles)

60

90

60

70

40
30
20
10

Maximum Ozone
Tropopause
TROPOSPHERE

Mt. Everest
-140 -120 -100 -80 -60 -40 -20 0 20 40
32
Temperature

60

10

80 100 120°F

The average temperature of the air above our heads, shown as a red line, as it varies from the surface of the
Earth to a height of 90 miles (about 145 kilometers.) Also shown are the conventional horizontal layers of
the atmosphere, which are defined by systematic changes in temperature; Mt. Everest, at 29,028 feet, the
highest point on the surface of the Earth; the maximum concentration of ozone in the lower stratosphere;
and the upper-atmospheric region in which energetic particles from the Sun or magnetosphere excite
atoms of air to produce aurorae. Incoming solar particles are chiefly blocked or attenuated by atoms and
molecules of air in the thermosphere, although some secondary neutrons from cosmic rays make it all the
way down into the troposphere.

working outside the space station in the thermosphere—some 250 miles above
the surface of the Earth where the kinetic temperature can range from 700 to
more than +1000°F—would be immersed in so rarified a medium that to him
or her it would feel very cold.

The Troposphere

T

he lowest of these five layers of the atmosphere is our home, the troposphere.
It is also the thinnest layer, extending upward to a height of but about seven
75
Back to Table of Contents

miles, or about 40,000 ft: roughly half again as high as Mt. Everest. Were
this layer of mostly breathable air included as a transparent shell on a 12-inch
library globe it would be about as thick as the paper of this page. Yet within
this thin veneer is almost all life on Earth, and the stage on which all but the
last few years of human history have been played out.
Within the troposphere are almost all of the moisture in the atmosphere, all
weather and climate as we know them, and all but the rarest of clouds. The
greenhouse gases—principally water vapor, carbon dioxide and methane—that
trap escaping terrestrial heat to keep the planet warm are found mostly within
the troposphere.
Unlike all the rest of the atmosphere, the troposphere is an integral part of
the biosphere, in that the air in this layer is connected interactively with the
oceans, the land, and living things through biogeochemical exchanges of
carbon, nitrogen, oxygen and other life-essential elements.
The tropo in tropo-sphere was chosen to indicate “turning” or “change,” and
more specifically, the steady drop in temperature that distinguishes this lowest
layer of the atmosphere as one ascends higher and higher above the solar heated
surface of the Earth. In seven miles (somewhat more at the equator and less
at the poles), the temperature falls through about 130°, from a global annual
mean value of about 60° F at the surface to 70° below zero at the very top,
where the next layer, the overlying stratosphere, begins.

The Stratosphere

At the transition between the thin troposphere and the more extensive
stratosphere—called the tropopause, meaning end of the troposphere—the
cooling trend reverses direction to follow a smooth and continued warming
that persists through the next 25 miles in altitude.

At one time the temperature of the air above the troposphere was thought to
remain more nearly constant with altitude, and hence the name strat, meaning
stretched-out or extended atmosphere. In fact, in the course of the climb through
the stratosphere, the air heats up by almost 100° F. There, about 32 miles above
the surface of the Earth, the temperature of the air (now about +20° F) is back
within the range of wintertime temperatures on the ground, which, were the
air more dense, would be comfortable enough to enjoy in a heavy coat, scarf
and stocking cap.
The lowest stratosphere is the region where most commercial jet aircraft fly, at
altitudes of six to eight miles above the surface. The instrumented meteorological
76

sounding balloons that are routinely launched, by hand, every day around the
world, make their measurements from ground level to an altitude of about 22
miles, more than halfway to the top of the stratosphere.
This distinctive 25-mile layer of heated air exists because within its bounds is
almost all of the ozone in the atmosphere.
Molecular ozone is a voracious but highly selective absorber that removes almost
all of the incoming solar ultraviolet radiation that penetrates to this depth in
the atmosphere, and in the process, warms the air around it. In performing this
function the ozone layer—which reaches down to a scant 8 miles above our
heads—stands as the last line of defense in the atmospheric shield: to protect
life on the planet from the daytime dose of potential lethal ultraviolet radiation
from the Sun.
The intimate relationship between ozone and near-ultraviolet radiation is
a give-and-take affair. Solar radiation in the near-ultraviolet region of the
spectrum produces ozone by breaking down molecules of ordinary oxygen
in the stratosphere. But the ozone created there by the Sun in turn absorbs
some of the incoming solar ultraviolet radiation in an adjoining region of the
ultraviolet spectrum.
Through a balance of these opposing effects, changes in the amount of
ultraviolet energy we receive from the Sun, as in the course of the 11-year solar
activity cycle, alter the amount of ozone in the stratosphere, as do the highenergy solar particles that come our way in the course of solar explosions and
eruptions. And in these modern times, our own activities—miles below the
stratosphere—have clearly reduced the amount of ozone in the ozone layer,
through our release of ozone-destroying chemicals, industrially, agriculturally,
and personally, at the surface of the Earth.
Our gaseous atmosphere is composed mostly of nitrogen and oxygen in
molecular and atomic form: ozone, a “trace” constituent, accounts for less
than one part per million, by weight or volume. Moreover, a protective ozone
layer is found on no other planet in the solar system, and the little we have is
endangered by what we do.

The Mesosphere and Thermosphere

At the stratopause, or end of the stratosphere, the scant ozone that still remains

can no longer heat the atmosphere, and there—a little more than thirty miles
above the surface—the temperature of the air again begins to drop, resuming
the kind of cooling with increased altitude that was the hallmark of the
77
Back to Table of Contents

troposphere. The cooling trend, though not as steep as that near the ground,
persists through the next 22 miles, through the overlying meso, or intermediate
atmosphere: called the mesosphere. Where the cooling ends—a little more
than 50 miles above the surface, at the mesopause—the air temperature has
fallen to minus 135° F, the lowest temperature found anywhere on Earth or in
its atmosphere.
Molecules of oxygen and nitrogen in the mesosphere absorb a portion of the
incoming solar ultraviolet radiation and as a result are broken apart into single
atoms of these gases. Beginning about halfway up through the mesosphere,
at a little more than 40 miles above the surface, these gases are present in the
atmosphere in both molecular and atomic form, with the balance shifting with
altitude toward the latter.
Ten miles higher, just above the mesopause—in the thermosphere, or heated
atmosphere—the profile of air temperature versus height undergoes its third and
final reversal, and the air once more begins to warm with increasing altitude.
The source of the added heat, as in the stratosphere, is again the absorption of
short wave radiation from the Sun, but this time in the more energetic extremeultraviolet and x-ray region of the solar spectrum. The heat absorbers in the
thermosphere—a vast region that stretches from 50 to more than 600 miles
above our heads and far above the “nominal” height of the atmosphere—are
the last remaining atoms and molecules of both oxygen and nitrogen, which
at these lofty heights provide the first line of defense against the full blast of
incoming solar short-wave radiation.
				
The end effect, in the lower half of the thermosphere, is a steep and phenomenal
rise in the temperature of the air, becoming ever hotter with altitude due to the
increased exposure of the air to the direct short-wave radiation from the Sun.
From a starting value of 135° below zero at the base of the thermosphere—about
50 miles above the surface of the Earth—the air warms so steadily with altitude
that but 20 miles higher, temperatures in the solar-heated thermosphere are
in the range of those experienced in southern Arizona in the summer. Just ten
miles higher—some 80 miles above the surface of the Earth—the temperature
of the air has reached the boiling point of water, although the air is far too thin
to do it.
And on and on it warms, without respite until—at an altitude of about 300
miles—these kinetic air temperatures in the sun-lit thermosphere have flattened
out in the range of 900 to 2000° F, depending on the highly variable amount of
x-ray and ultraviolet radiation that the Sun happens to be releasing at the time.
78

The tenuous air in the thermosphere, moreover, has little thermal inertia, or
heat-holding power, and as a consequence, the air temperature goes through
extreme bimodal swings from night to day, as well as strong seasonal variations,
and dramatic changes in the course of changes in solar activity.
				
The thermosphere is the region of the atmosphere where many Earth-orbiting
spacecraft fly, and the place where the meteors that find their way into the
atmosphere are heated by friction to produce shooting stars and meteor
showers. It is also the site of auroral displays: the northern and southern lights
which are most often seen at higher latitudes in the nighttime sky.

The Ionized Upper Atmosphere

T

he absorption of solar EUV and x-ray radiation in the thermosphere
provokes major changes in its composition as well as temperature: namely the
ionization of atoms and molecules of air, which converts these neutral particles
into electrically-charged ions (+) and free electrons (-).
The natural tendency of oppositely charged particles that come in contact with
each other is to immediately recombine, and in the process, restore neutral
atoms and molecules. But in the rarefied air of the upper atmosphere where
encounters are less frequent, the newly-created electrons and ions can survive
for a longer time: to about one second in the less diffuse air of the mesosphere
to about an hour at the top of the thermosphere.
Although these added times are very short, they are long enough to establish
and sustain an electrically charged layer, called the ionosphere, as a permanent
feature of the upper atmosphere.
This region of electrically-charged particles extends upward from the middle
of the mesosphere, about 35 miles above the surface, through the entire
thermosphere and well beyond it, with a maximum density of charged particles
in the region between about 125 and 375 miles altitude, which puts it within
the lower portion of the magnetosphere. But it stretches on and upward,
gradually decreasing in density with height, for thousands of miles.
While always there, the ionosphere is highly variable from place to place and
time to time, in both structure and density. Dramatic changes occur each day
when the Sun rises or sets. The ionosphere is also highly responsive to changes
in the x-ray and ultraviolet emission from the Sun, which vary by more than
a factor of two in the course of the 11-year solar activity cycle, and by even
79
Back to Table of Contents

more on shorter time scales in the course of solar flares and the effect of solar
rotation. It is also subject to magnetospheric storms, to the passage of meteors,
and to the violent winds that sweep through the thermosphere on the heels of
thermospheric temperature changes.
The ionosphere is made up of fairly distinct horizontal layers of differing
density. When night falls and the Sun’s electromagnetic radiation is turned off,
the lower portions of the ionosphere—which are called the D and E layers, or
regions—essentially disappear, leaving only the higher and denser F region—
which survives, though much depleted, through the night, chiefly by the return
of some of the electrons and ions from the magnetosphere.
During the day the F region is a major exporter of ions and electrons, which are
carried upward into the realm of the magnetosphere by the thermal expansion
of the ionosphere. During the night, as the ionosphere cools and contracts,
some of these particles are drawn back to it, helping sustain the now depleted
F layer until dawn: when, energized by the rising Sun, it bounds back to full
strength again.
				
The existence of an electrically-conducting region in the upper atmosphere,
though long suspected, was not confirmed until the age of radio, early in the
last century when its reflective properties were employed for practical use in
the long-distance transmission of radio waves. The reflectivity is greatest for
lower frequency (longer wavelength) radio signals, for which the ionosphere
serves as a mirror high in the sky to redirect upward-transmitted waves by a
single forward reflection—or multiple reflections between the mirror and the
ground—around the curvature of the spherical Earth.
Ionospheric reflection of radio waves was first put to use in 1901, by Guglielmo
Marconi, with the successful transmission of a brief wireless signal from England
to Newfoundland. But it was not until the 1920s, with the advent of broadcast
radio, that the ionosphere was widely acknowledged and given its name.
The fuller exploitation of all parts of the radio spectrum since that time has
demonstrated that hour-to-hour and day-to-day variations and inhomogeneities
in the ionosphere can affect all kinds of radio communications, from the lowest
to the highest frequencies, including those used today in connection with the
communication satellites that are more and more employed for television,
satellite phones, GPS, and national security.
				

80

And so it was that a very old, unknown and invisible feature near the top of the
Earth’s atmosphere came to be of immense economic and practical importance
on the ground.

The End of the Atmosphere

U

nlike the oceans, the Earth’s atmosphere holds claim to no fixed upper
bound. It comes to an end instead through a process of gradual diminution:
with the air growing ever thinner and more diffuse the higher one goes, until
it eventually blends into the almost-vacuum of near-Earth space, much as
recorded sound is faded into silence at the finish of a song.
The imaginary line that marks the threshold of space—like the invisible Equator
ceremoniously crossed by cruise passengers—is for astronauts arbitrarily taken
to be 60 miles above the surface of the Earth, where the pressure and density
of air have already fallen by more than a factor of a million. This puts this
dividing line in the lower thermosphere, toward the bottom of the ionospheric
E layer where neutral and ionized particles coexist, and within the part of the
upper atmosphere where incoming meteors paint their star-like trails. But it
is considerably lower than where manned spacecraft fly and far below the last
vestiges of neutral air.
It was into this lower region of the thermosphere—from about 100 to 200
miles above the surface—that manned spacecraft were first placed in orbit
about the Earth: piloted in 1961 by Yuri Gagarin and in 1962 by John Glenn.
To reduce the effects of atmospheric drag, instrumented spacecraft with longer
life expectancies were later launched into higher orbits, into the more rarefied
air of the upper thermosphere and the region beyond it, the exosphere.
The neutrally-charged atmosphere comes to an end at about 600 miles above
the Earth’s surface, where electrically-charged ions and electrons—created by
the action of solar EUV and x-ray radiation on neutral atoms and molecules—
have become the dominant species.
The change from a neutral gas to a charged, plasma atmosphere begins in the
high stratosphere, some 40 miles above the surface of the Earth. From that level
upward—through the three variable layers of concentrated ions and electrons
that make up the ionosphere—electrically-charged constituents are more and
more plentiful. Behind this persistent shift is the gradual thinning of air with
altitude, which (1) allows more of the full blast of short-wave solar radiation to
reach the neutral particles; and (2) extends the time allowed to newly-created
ions and free electrons before they re-combine and neutralize each other.
81
Back to Table of Contents

Where the thermosphere ends, the outermost portion of the atmosphere, or
exosphere, begins: the last thin vestiges of the atmosphere where all particles—
neutral or charged—are on their way out of the atmosphere, and hence the
name. The few neutral atoms and molecules that are there escape on the wings
of their high thermal velocities, some of them into the magnetosphere.

Into the Magnetosphere

I

n this vast region of near-Earth space, it is no longer pressure and heat and
chemistry, but magnetic forces that hold the reins of power and control: trapping
and confining electrically-charged particles that have exited the exosphere,
while at the same time shielding the planet from many charged particles that
come at it from other directions.
The trapping and confining are accomplished within a grandiose and manychambered structure made of magnetic lines of force that reach outward from
the planet’s internal magnetic field.
As our planet’s first and outermost line of defense, the magnetosphere deflects
away from the Earth most of the charged, energetic atomic particles that stream
outward from the Sun, and some that come from other cosmic sources. Its
outer boundary, called the magnetopause, is the unseen line, drawn in space,
that for billions of years has separated the Earth and its defenses from the
hostile world of near-Earth space.
Although we never see it, the mighty fortress of the magnetosphere is truly
immense: large enough to dwarf the planet it encloses and protects, extending
outward from the Earth toward the Sun for a distance of roughly 40,000
miles, or ten times the radius of the Earth. Moreover in the opposite, antisolar direction it stretches outward into space for at least 800,000 miles: more
than three times the distance to the Moon. Were it as large as its voluminous
magnetosphere, our little Earth would replace Jupiter as the largest planet in
the solar system.
Inside the inner magnetosphere we are yet within the strong grip of the Earth’s
gravity, and still in the company of some un-ionized atoms and even molecules
of what might be called air, were they not so few and far between. As noted
above, these last remnants of oxygen and nitrogen and other elements will
continue to be found, though in ever-dwindling numbers, for hundreds of
miles above the lower boundary of the magnetosphere.
In this fast-fading part of the gaseous atmosphere, neutral atoms of different
elements are sorted by weight based on their response to the pull of the Earth’s
82

Nightside
Magnetopause
Current

Bow Shock

tail Lobe

Magneto

Cusp

Auroral
Oval

Plasma
Mantle

Cro

ss-

Ionosphere
Trapped Particles

nt

FAC

Fie
nt
ld-al
igned Curre

Cur

ren

t

rre

Plasma
Sphere

tail

Ring

Cu

Magnetopause

Dayside Magnetopause
Current
Solar Wind

A simplified three-dimensional representation of the Sun-facing portion of the Earth’s magnetosphere:
the volume of space surrounding our planet that is dominated by the geomagnetic field and populated
with plasmas from both the ionosphere and the solar wind. In the “upstream” direction, at left, the
magnetopause, or outer boundary of the magnetosphere, is compressed by the solar wind on its Sunfacing side, pushing this boundary inward to about 40,000 miles (5 Earth diameters) above the planet’s
surface. Farther upstream a standing shock wave called the bow shock forms as the supersonic solar
wind is slowed and heated by its initial encounter with the still-distant magnetosphere. On the night
or “downstream” side, right, interaction with the streaming solar wind stretches the Earth’s field into an
elongated tail which extends more than 30 times farther: well beyond the orbit of the Moon and what is
shown here. The ionized gases that populate the magnetosphere are extremely dilute and wholly invisible
to our eyes. Nonetheless, they drive a system of powerful electric currents which during magnetic storms
can dissipate well in excess of 100 billion watts of power, comparable to the output of all the electric
power plants operating in the United States.

gravity. Through this process, heavier atoms and molecules are held closer and
more tightly to the Earth, and the lighter more loosely bound. Thus as one moves
higher in the atmosphere there are fewer and fewer heavy elements, until near
the top, only hydrogen and helium, the lightest of all the elements, remain.
At that level many of the atoms that are present are no longer the gravitational
captives of the Earth. Thanks to the energy and speed they acquired in their
passage through the heated thermosphere, these fast-moving atoms are well on
their way to freedom: no longer the wards of the little planet that has been their
home for more than 4 billion years.
83
Back to Table of Contents

The Form and Function of the Magnetosphere

Long before Columbus, voyagers on land and sea had made use of the fact

that the Earth was somehow magnetized: in such a way that one end of a
lodestone or an iron compass needle was attracted toward the North Pole of
the Earth, and the other to the South Pole.

As more was learned about magnets and the nature of magnetism, it came to be
known that the Earth’s magnetic field was a lot like that of a simple bar magnet:
that is to say, with an oppositely-magnetized pole at either end, connected,
one to the other, by curved invisible magnetic lines of force. Each of these was
expected to arch outward from its roots in one of the magnetic poles of the
planet and follow a gradual C-shaped curve, some distance above the surface
of the Earth, to connect at the opposite magnetic pole.
				
					
					
It was also surmised, as early as 1930, that this idealized picture of the Earth’s
magnetic field—which should take a form similar to the pattern traced by
iron filings above a laboratory magnet in a classroom demonstration—would
be disturbed and distorted whenever charged particles shot out from the Sun
impinged upon it.

		

		

Further insight into the likely form of the magnetosphere came in the late 1950s
and early 1960s with the realization that a continually blowing solar wind would
exert unrelenting pressure on the Sun-facing half of the magnetosphere. This
was bound to hammer the idealized rounded C-shaped form of field lines on
the day-side of the Earth into a flatter C, and in the process push the protective
magnetic shield on that side much closer to the surface of the planet.
										
		
But it was not until the voyages of exploration of near-Earth space began, in the
remaining years of the 20th century, that the actual form, function and great
extent of the Earth’s magnetosphere—and its ever-changing nature—came to
be fully known and understood.

84

				
In many ways, including the societal value of what was found, these venturesome
missions to explore and map the unknown near-environment of the Earth
were not unlike the great voyages of discovery of the late 15th and early 16th
centuries.
Most striking among their discoveries was the pronounced asymmetry of the
magnetosphere: highly compressed and flattened on the side that faced the
Sun, and grossly distended on the opposite, down-wind side. There, above the
darkened half of the planet, the solar wind drags the lines of force of the Earth’s
magnetic field in the anti-solar direction into an extended tail, like that of a
comet.
Within this grossly lop-sided magnetic shield, shaped by the Sun, the spherical
Earth spins on its own axis at the rate of one rotation per day. The result
is that the thickness of the magnetosphere above any fixed place on Earth is
continually changing, and by vast amounts: thinnest at local noon; increasing
through the afternoon until, as darkness falls, it stretches out above one’s head
beyond the orbit of the Moon, only to shrink back again to but a twentieth of
its nighttime extent when at dawn the Sun again appears.

The Paths That Particles Follow

T

he Earth’s magnetosphere, though an essential protector of life on Earth, is
not 100% effective in this regard. Plasma and higher energy particles arriving
from the Sun or other celestial sources can find their way, if their energies
are sufficient or conditions are right, through the outer bulwarks of the
magnetosphere and into the ionosphere and upper atmosphere.
As noted earlier, the incoming solar wind plasma, as it approaches the Earth’s
magnetosphere first comes upon a more distant, then a nearer barrier. The
initial bulwark is a shock wave—known as the bow shock—which forms ahead
of the Sun-facing “nose” of the magnetosphere.
There, pressure forces deflect, slow and heat the incoming plasma diverting
it away from the direct Sun-to-Earth line. Similar forces produce the sweptback sheath of illuminated dust which forms around the solid head of a comet
approaching the Sun.
Slightly farther on, the incoming plasma comes in contact with the
magnetopause, the outer boundary of the magnetosphere. There it meets a
85
Back to Table of Contents

barrier of closed magnetic field lines that are oriented more perpendicularly to
the particle’s path.
				
Most of the onrushing plasma is diverted around the magnetopause, like the
diversion of a flowing stream by a partially-submerged rock. Some of the
diverted flow sweeps over the poles of the Earth, and a fraction of that will find
its way into the magnetosphere through unguarded gaps at the poles called the
polar cusps.
				
Another means of entry for incoming plasma in either the solar wind or from
more energetic particles is available in the vicinity of the equatorial, Sunfacing nose of the magnetopause. Whether that door is open or closed depends
upon the polarity and orientation of the imbedded magnetic field that the
alien plasma brings with it. When it is the same (or almost the same) as the
orientation of the Earth’s magnetic field, the particles that impinge upon it
will be deflected and redirected as noted above, to continue their downward
passage around the outer boundary of the magnetosphere.
If the polarity and orientation of the impinging magnetic field are opposite
to that of the Earth (or nearly so) magnetic field lines in the incoming plasma
stream will connect to the oppositely-directed field lines of the magnetosphere,
which opens up additional routes, some through the polar cusps, into its
guarded interior.

Captive Particles In the Magnetosphere

T

he same lines of force that prevent charged particles from entering the
magnetosphere and atmosphere serve as well to entrap and confine any that
from whatever source have found their way into the magnetic cage. These
include some of the solar and cosmic particles that have worked their way
around the bulwarks and into the magnetosphere, as well as those from the
ionosphere and exosphere that have entered it from below.
Thus the electrons, protons, and ions that are magnetically confined at any
time in the holding cells of the magnetosphere are often strangers: a mixture of
immigrants arriving from afar and transients of local origin, who were caught
on their way out of our atmosphere in the same magnetic net.

86

The most energetic are captured solar protons and electrons with energies in
the range of a million or more electron volts, and they behave like swarms of
angry bees, once free to roam but now confined. These and others less energetic
are held in the Earth’s magnetic grasp within flat current sheets in the inner
magnetosphere that circle the planet in the plane of the Earth’s magnetic
equator. Others are held in the stretched magnetotail, in the radiation belts, or
held within a well-worn set of tightly prescribed paths defined by the arching
form of individual lines of magnetic force that are rooted in the north and
south auroral ovals.
Constrained in this way, captive particles in the inner magnetosphere trace out
a ritual dance of helical spins, bouncing reversals, and longitudinal drifts which
take them back and forth from pole to pole, over and over again, while drifting
around and around the Earth: and all of it frenetically, at break-neck speed.
				
In the first of the prescribed motions, a moving charged particle that comes into
the vicinity of a line of magnetic force is drawn by its influence to gyrate (or
circle) around it, as fast as a thousand turns per second, while following its full
length from one pole to the other. As the tightly-spiraling particle approaches
either end of a closed field line, at high magnetic latitudes, it meets an ever
stronger and more crowded polar field, where adjacent field lines are packed
more closely together.
There, at the end of the line, the second step is taken. Faced with stronger
and more closely-packed field lines, the downward-moving gyrating particle
is reflected and repelled, as from a magnetic mirror, and spiraled back from
whence it came. When the now-reversed particle approaches the other end
of the same closed field line—at the opposite magnetic pole—the same thing
happens again. And on and on it goes, on a wild ride: bouncing back and forth
from one pole of the Earth to the other, tightly spinning as it goes, completing
each pole-to-pole trip in but a few minutes time.
The third obligatory motion is an induced, slower drift in longitude that results
from the curvature of the magnetic field lines and the diminished strength of
the field with distance above the surface of the planet. The effect is to nudge the
gyrating particle a little bit in longitude—an electron in the eastward direction,
protons or other positive ions westward—each time it bounces. Repeated
nudging pushes it, bit by bit, around the Earth, such that the pole-to-pole
motions of the particle sweep over the entire surface of the planet, all in about
one hour.
87
Back to Table of Contents

The paths of the hordes of particles engaged in these and other patterns of
motion delineate the form of the enclosures in which captured particles are
detained. One follows the framework of closed field lines, reaching from pole
to pole, that define the basic form of the Earth’s magnetic field. The other is
a ring of current flowing around the magnetic equator of the Earth, which
defines two bagel-shaped reservoirs that store charged particles in two belts of
charged particles.

The Earth’s Radiation Belts

T

hese near-Earth reservoirs of magnetically-trapped particles are the inner and
outer Van Allen radiation belts, which were unknown and largely unexpected
until early 1958, when they were chanced upon by the first U.S. satellite,
Explorer 1, and named for their discoverer, the late James A. Van Allen.

Schematic depiction, not to scale, of an idealized cross section of the plasmasphere (in blue) and the two
doughnut-shaped concentrations of the high energy atomic particles that lie within its bounds, defining
the Earth’s inner and outer radiation Van Allen belts. Zones where the concentration of particles is
greatest are colored red, then yellow and green. Between the inner and outer radiation belts is the (blue)
gap or slot region, a zone swept free of particles by physical interactions.

88

Particles trapped within them are confined within two distinct and clearly
separated zones, each shaped much like a bagel, that surround the Earth. The
inner radiation belt—containing energetic electrons, protons and heavier ions,
all in frantic motion—extends from the top of the atmosphere to a height
of about 12,000 miles: a distance, measured from the center of the planet, of
about three Earth radii, or 3 RE.
The outer belt, of similar shape but larger diameter, reaches from about 16,000
to 24,000 miles (and at times as much as 36,000 miles) above the surface of
the Earth, or between about 4 and 6 RE, and at times as much as 10 RE. Within
it are the lightest and least energetic of charged atomic particles, which are
weaker electrons with energies in the range of 10,000 to about one million
electron volts. They come largely in lower energy plasmas that have entered the
magnetosphere from the solar wind and the Earth’s ionosphere.
Between the inner and outer belts—from about 12,000 to 16,000 miles above
the surface of the Earth—is an empty gap or slot about 4000 miles wide:
a region of near-Earth space in which protons but few if any electrons are
found. This empty region between the highly-populated radiation belts is the
result of a loss mechanism involving the interaction of charged particles and
electromagnetic waves, that is particularly effective in that zone.
				
One of the ways by which moving charged particles can escape the radiation
belts is through a chance encounter with any force that sufficiently alters its
energy or disturbs its path and manner of movement. This can occur in the
presence of electromagnetic radiation of a frequency that happens to resonate
with the particle’s own motion. This wave-particle interaction, which has
maximum effect at a distance of 3 to 4 RE, creates the gap between the inner
and outer radiation belts: sweeping out newly-bound electrons as fast as they
are supplied.
				
Few if any of the charged particles that were chanced upon in the Earth’s
radiation belts in 1958 are still there today, for although some can indeed
remain for hundreds of years, following the same well-worn paths, most—in
time—will find their way out of captivity, through the wave-particle process
just described, or other mechanisms.
Among the other processes that continually deplete the particle belts are collisions
between the charged particles that spiral downward with atoms and molecules
89
Back to Table of Contents

of air at the foot points of magnetic field lines high in the atmosphere, other
forms of downward diffusion, and almost any externally-caused disturbance of
the magnetosphere. Particles to replace the departed continually arrive from
three quite different sources: the Sun, the Earth’s ionosphere, and some of the
energetic particles called cosmic rays.
Cosmic rays that come from outside the solar system arrive with energies
per particle of up to a billion or more electron volts: sufficient to speed right
through the magnetosphere as though it weren’t there. Those found in the
inner radiation belt are their less energetic “daughter particles”—a second
generation of ions created in the Earth’s atmosphere when the original
primary cosmic ray particles collide with atoms and molecules of air. Some
of these secondary cosmic rays can move upward by diffusion through the
upper atmosphere and into the magnetosphere, where, if they carry an electric
charge, they are entrapped.
These upwardly-mobile secondary cosmic rays serve also as a primary source of
particles for the inner radiation belt.
Charged particles are also created in the mesosphere and thermosphere when
neutral atoms and molecules of air absorb far ultraviolet and x-ray radiation from
the Sun. Upwardly-mobile ions and electrons from the upper thermosphere
are subject to the same fate of magnetic capture and confinement as those
produced by incoming solar particles and galactic cosmic rays.
				
Test explosions of nuclear weapons in near-Earth space—at a time when they
were allowed—were also found to add energetic charged particles to the Earth’s
radiation belts. Best remembered is the “Starfish Prime” test conducted by the
U.S. over Johnston Island in the Pacific Ocean on July 9, 1962: when an
awareness of the radiation belts was but four years old.
THE EARTH’S RADIATION BELTS
GEOCENTRIC
DISTANCE IN RE

FEATURE
Inner Radiation Belt
Slot Region
Outer Radiation Belt
Plasmasphere
For Reference: Orbits of GPS Satellites
Geosynchronous Orbit

90

DISTANCE ABOVE
EARTH’S SURFACE
IN MILES

1.2 - 3

650 – 12,000

3-4

12,000 – 16,000

4 - 6+

16,000 – 24,000+

1.2 - 6

1000 – 20,000

5

≈16,000

6.6

22, 200

Exploded in the thermosphere at an altitude of 250 miles (about the same
height at which the International Space Station now operates), the Starfish 1.4
megaton thermonuclear device filled the radiation belts with highly energetic
electrons and positrons, some of which were still there five years later. The
consequences of this apparently unanticipated happening were more than
academic, for these entrapped particles of human origin crippled about onethird of all spacecraft in low-Earth orbit at the time, including Telstar, the first
commercial communications satellite.

The Plasmasphere

Co-existing with the swarms of high energy particles held captive in the inner

and outer radiation belts is another more extensive torus, depicted in blue on
the figure on page 88, called the plasmasphere, which is filled with charged
particles whose energies are many orders of magnitude weaker. Particles found
in the plasmasphere are electrons, protons and singly ionized helium, along with
a small amount of singly-ionized oxygen. These are for the most part remnants
of the splitting apart of these atoms by solar short-wave radiation far below in
the thermosphere and mesosphere. Atmospheric diffusion carries them along
magnetic field lines into the magnetosphere, where they are captured and held.
The energy of any one of these more lethargic or “cold plasma” particles is at
most a few electron volts, which for comparison corresponds to the thermal
motion imparted by being heated to 20,000° to perhaps 40,000° F. In contrast,
the electrons and ions in the hotter plasma of the inner radiation belt are
suprathermal particles with energies of up to a million or more electron volts,
corresponding to almost unimaginable temperatures of billions of degrees.

The plasmasphere extends from just above the ionosphere—about 1000 miles
above the surface of the Earth—to a distance of up to 20,000 miles, or 6 RE,
which is almost a tenth as far as the Moon. As such, the plasmasphere overlaps
the full extent of the inner radiation belt (about 1¼ to 3 RE) and a good part
of the outer one (4 to 6 RE).
The cold plasma in the plasmasphere is held there by the same lines of magnetic
force that confine hotter plasma in the radiation belts. But since these particles
are less energetic, they are bound by a different set of constraints.
One difference is that they are spread continuously and without interruption
from the exosphere to about 6 RE, for they are unaffected by the “zone of
avoidance” mechanism that sweeps energetic electrons from the gap in the
radiation belts between 3 and 4 RE.
91
Back to Table of Contents

As a result, the extent of the plasmasphere on any day, and how densely it is
filled, are more variable than the radiation belts. Particle density can vary from
about 1000 to 20,000 captive protons per cubic inch. The outer boundary
of the plasmasphere, called the plasmapause, can reach all the way out to the
magnetopause. And like the radiation belts, the plasmapause retreats inward
toward the surface of the planet at those times when the Earth’s magnetic
field becomes connected to that of the Sun, moving at times from a distance
of about 20,000 to but 4000 miles above the surface of the Earth. Like the
magnetosphere of which it is a part, the plasmasphere is also asymmetric,
bulging outward on the nighttime side.
Because of their low energies, particles in the plasmasphere pose no hazard
to spaceflight, in contrast to the swarms of charged particles that encircle
the planet in the radiation belts which can affect manned or instrumented
spacecraft that enter or pass near them. Manned spacecraft that routinely
travel in orbits nearer the surface of the Earth—like those that took the first
cosmonauts and astronauts around the world in ninety minutes, or the wellworn trails of the International Space Station—are largely exempt, for these
venture no farther than a few hundred miles above the surface of the Earth,
well within the thermosphere and ionosphere.

The Heliosphere

W

hen spacecraft cross the outer boundary of the magnetosphere they leave
behind all natural protection against high-energy atomic particles from the
Sun or the cosmos. From this point onward, and for at least the next 15 billion
miles, spacecraft—manned or instrumented—will travel in a much harsher
environment: the vast untamed realm of the much extended Sun, called the
heliosphere.
This immense zone in interstellar space is the region dominated by the solar
wind and the remnant parts of the Sun’s magnetic field that are carried with
it, and it stretches outward from the Sun to a distance well beyond the world
of planets and planetesimals. Beyond its distant outer boundary—called the
heliopause—lies the broader realm of other stars and other galaxies.
The heliosphere is commonly described as an oversize “bubble” surrounding
the Sun and all the planets: a protected zone within the interstellar plasma,
carved out by the solar wind and sustained by the Sun’s extended magnetic
field. It “protects” in the sense that the solar plasma that flows continually
outward from the Sun is strong enough to fend off most of the plasma that
comes in stellar winds from other stars, and to keep out all but the most
energetic cosmic rays.
92

In this sense, the heliosphere is a much larger version of the Earth’s
magnetosphere, which provides a smaller bubble of magnetic protection
around our tiny planet, protecting life upon it from most incoming charged
atomic particles, both from the Sun and from more distant cosmic sources.
The mighty Sun would seem to require no such protection for itself from
incoming atomic particles—whatever their energy—although the planets,
all of which are found within the innermost core of the heliosphere, benefit
from the presence of this distant outer rampart and the additional magnetic
shielding that it provides.
Within the heliosphere the solar wind blows radially away from the Sun and
in all directions. It does so until the solar plasma has traveled so far that the
outward pressure it exerts, determined by its speed and its ever decreasing
density, no longer exceeds the competing, combined pressure of similar stellar
winds from all the other stars, near or far.
				
The distance at which the solar wind first meets and is overcome by the pressure
of incoming stellar winds varies with direction. It is nearest on the side that
faces the direction in which the Sun and the heliosphere are moving through
the interstellar medium: which indeed they are, taking the Earth and all the
other planets with them. The velocity of the Sun relative to the local interstellar
medium in our region of the Galaxy is a little more than 12 miles per second,
or 45,000 miles per hour. And its direction—should you want to check it out
on a starry night—is toward the bright star Vega in the summer constellation
Lyra, just north of the Milky Way.
At the place where the solar wind first begins to feel the competing force of
stellar winds a shock wave forms, much like the bow shock that forms near the
outer boundary of the Earth’s magnetosphere, or the bow wave ahead of the
bow of a moving ship. In passing through this termination shock, the solar
wind slows down from supersonic (about a million miles per hour) to subsonic
speeds, and is partially deflected away from the direction of the Sun’s motion
through the interstellar medium.
The heliopause—marking the true outer limit of the heliosphere—lies beyond
the termination shock and is separated from it by the sheath of weakened and
diverted solar wind. At its closest point, directly ahead of the moving Sun, the
distance between the termination shock and the heliopause is a billion miles or
so. This places the end of the heliosphere at a minimum of perhaps 10 billion
miles from the Sun, or roughly 30 times more distant than Pluto. Thus the
Earth and all the other planets and planet-like objects occupy but the inner
core of the far larger heliosphere.
93
Back to Table of Contents

The shape of the heliosphere, like that of the magnetosphere, most closely
resembles an extended windsock, with a long tail that stretches behind the
moving Sun as it travels through space. It is also thought that the extent of the
heliosphere may respond to solar activity in that some in situ evidence suggests
that the termination shock lies farther from the Sun in years when the Sun is
more active and closer in years of minimum activity.
In this case the response at the termination shock to changing conditions on
the Sun will be necessarily delayed by the year or so needed for the solar wind
to reach that far-distant point.

Cruising the Heliosphere

M

ore than 3,000 spacecraft—an average of more than 100 each year—have
been successfully lifted into near-Earth space since the launch of Sputnik in
the autumn of 1957. Only a handful of these, however, have ventured beyond
the magnetopause: the line that marks the outer limit of our world and the
beginning of the heliosphere. Most of the rest have been placed in more
mundane, circular orbits around the Earth at varied angles of inclination to
the plane of the Earth’s equator, including many whose orbits take them in
polar orbits over the North and South Poles of the planet.
Most of these Earth-bound spacecraft, including John Glenn’s Mercury 6 and
today’s International Space Station, have followed what are now familiar courses
around the planet while clinging closely to it: remaining within the bounds of
the upper thermosphere at altitudes of several hundred miles and completing
each pass around the Earth in about ninety minutes time.
Some—including almost all communications satellites and the weather satellites
that provide the familiar images of cloud cover for the evening news—are placed
in higher, geosynchronous or geostationary orbits for which the time needed
to circle the Earth is precisely twenty-four hours: the same as the rotation rate
of the Earth itself. Satellites that orbit the Earth in this way appear fixed in the
sky—unlike the ever-circling Sun and Moon and stars—remaining night and
day above the same fixed geographical region on the surface of the Earth.
To achieve a geosynchronous orbit, a spacecraft must be lifted well above the
thermosphere to an altitude of 22,200 miles: which is almost a tenth of the
distance to the Moon. At this height, it will circle the Earth within the outer
radiation belt, still within the magnetosphere but tens of thousands of miles
below its outer boundary.

94

Among those that have gone beyond that line are the manned and unmanned
spacecraft that have traveled to the Moon, instrumented explorers of the
solar system and its planets, and “in situ” samplers and monitors of the solar
wind. With very few exceptions, however, all of these ventures into the open
space that lies beyond the Earth’s protective shell have been limited to the
two dimensions of the ecliptic plane in which the Earth orbits the Sun. This
restriction has kept these venturers within a very thin slice of the true extent of
the three-dimensional heliosphere.
				
The most venturesome of those that have left the ecliptic plane is the Ulysses
spacecraft, launched in the autumn of 1990, and first dispatched to distant
Jupiter. There, almost two years later and far from home, it succeeded in
harnessing the gravitational pull of that most massive of the planets to hurl
itself, as from a slingshot, out of the ecliptic and into a polar orbit around
the Sun, passing alternately over the north and south rotational poles of the
star: where no spacecraft from the Earth had ever gone before. And there it
operates today.
This truly epic voyage of discovery takes Ulysses about as close to the Sun
as the orbit of Mars, and as far away as the orbit of Jupiter: in an elliptical
orbit that takes more than six years to complete. Along the way, month after
month and year upon year, it gathers and sends back to Earth a host of in
situ measurements that tell of conditions in the solar wind, probing the threedimensional inner heliosphere through all seasons of the Sun’s 11-year cycle
of activity. These data have proved to be of inestimable value in defining the
velocities and the solar sources of both high- and low-speed streams in the solar
wind, the three-dimensional nature of the Sun’s extended magnetic field, and
the spatial distribution of cosmic rays in the inner heliosphere.
				
Two other pioneering spacecraft, Voyager 1 and Voyager 2, launched about two
weeks apart in 1977—thirty-two years ago—have now made their way to the
outer limits of the heliosphere. Within perhaps the next ten years the most
distant of the pair, Voyager 1, is expected to achieve the long-sought goal—like
that of finding the source of the Nile, or first reaching the frigid Poles of the
Earth—of finding the end of the heliosphere: the heliopause. And crossing it,
to enter the interstellar medium.
These identical spacecraft were sent like two ships of discovery on extended
voyages through the solar system. On the way Voyager 1 first visited the giant
95
Back to Table of Contents

planet Jupiter, and Voyager 2, not far behind, gaseous Saturn, Uranus and
Neptune, as well as their moons, in part to take the measure of their magnetic
fields. By 1989 they had made their last planetary encounter; accomplished
all their initial tasks and more; and sailed on to explore the farthest limits of
the solar system. Because the radiation from the Sun is so feeble at these great
distances—where it appears as but a point of light in a black sky—the Voyagers
were both powered by batteries continually charged by the decay of plutonium,
which are expected to last until about the year 2020.
On the 16th of December of 2004, after twenty-seven years of voyaging, Voyager
1, then about 8.7 billion miles from the Sun and the Earth, came upon and
passed through the termination shock of the heliosphere: where the solar wind
first experiences effects of opposing gusts from other stars. Like the reflected
swells that told early Polynesian navigators that land lay ahead, somewhere over
the horizon, this expected wall of high pressure in the farthermost heliosphere
served as a clear sign that the heliopause—the true end of the heliosphere—lay
out there, somewhere, dead ahead.
The news of this historic crossing, coded in solar wind and magnetic data that
were transmitted—like all radio waves—at the speed of light—took thirteen
hours to reach the Earth. In the first year of its journey, as Voyager 1 passed
the Moon, the transmission time was less than two seconds, and from Jupiter,
forty minutes.
Voyager 1 now travels onward within the heliosheath of diminishing solar winds
that stands between the termination shock and the end of the heliosphere, with
miles to go before it sleeps. The distance it must still travel to make it there
is not known with certainty, but thought to be another billion miles or so. At
its present rate of travel it will require almost another decade—until about
2015—to reach that goal.
Voyager 2, following the same course at the same speed is about two years
behind it, soon to make its own passage through the termination shock, and
to cross the finish line in about 2017. About three years later—after sailing
another half billion miles into the Great Unknown—the atomic batteries
which by then will have kept the little spacecraft alive for more than forty years
will finally fail, leaving the then voiceless ships to sail on alone in silence, into
the dark of space.

96

97
Back to Table of Contents

Radiation in the form of heat and light provides almost all of the energy transferred between the Sun and the Earth, shown here in
close proximity. The diameter of the Sun is actually about 100 times larger than that of the Earth, and the distance that separates
them—about 93 million miles—is equal to well more than 100 solar diameters. Thus the Earth seen from its constant benefactor
would appear little larger than a dot in the sky.

FLUCTUATIONS IN SOLAR
RADIATION AT THE EARTH
Changes in Total Solar Irradiance

It has long been known that the face of the Sun changes from day to day with

the coming and going of sunspots and faculae on its white-light surface; that the
outer layers of the solar atmosphere—the chromosphere and corona—are even
more dynamic and variable; and that solar explosions and eruptions are everyday
occurrences on the star. But to what extent do these transient features alter the
amount of solar energy we receive at the Earth, 93 million miles away?
For example, how great of a surge can we expect when the flood of x-rays
and extreme ultraviolet radiation from an explosive solar flare arrives at the
Earth, in eight minutes time? Or seven minutes after that, when solar energetic
protons, propelled outward at half the speed of light, come upon us from the
same cataclysmic event on the Sun? How much added energy must the outer
atmosphere of the Earth absorb when an incoming blob of charged solar plasma,
ejected from the corona a few days before, becomes magnetically connected—
like the accidental contact of two hot wires—to our own magnetosphere?
Or the most commonly-asked question regarding the Sun (which remained
unanswered and unanswerable for more than 360 years after Galileo first found
sunspots): What is the effect— if any—on the total amount of heat and light
we receive when sunspots come and go?

				
Since sunspots appear darker than the surrounding photosphere, they have
obviously reduced the flow of radiation from the restricted area of the solar disk
that each one covers. Faculae, which are brighter than the surrounding surface,
clearly add locally to the total radiation emitted.
Could it be that what one takes away, the other immediately restores? That
each sunspot simply acts as a plug to deflect without stopping the flow of solar
energy that pushes inexorably upward from deep within the star?
Were this the case, the total solar irradiance—the amount of energy that the
Sun delivers in all wavelengths at the top of the Earth’s atmosphere—might
indeed be called, as long it was, the “solar constant.”
99
Back to Table of Contents

We know now, based on more than a quarter century of direct measurements
taken from space, that there is and never was a solar constant. The total amount
of energy emitted from the Sun varies on all scales of time, from seconds to
years, as does the energy emitted in any of the different spectral components
that contribute to that sum. Everything changes, all of the time: the radiative
energy emitted in x-ray, ultraviolet, visible, infrared, and radio wavelengths as
well as the energy carried outward from the star in the form of energetic atomic
particles. All of them respond to varying magnetic activity on the surface of
the Sun.
We also know that the flow of solar energy in each of these components—
and their sum—increases when the Sun is more active, peaking at times of
maxima of the 11-year solar cycle, only to fall back down again in years of
minimum activity.
				
The overall level of solar activity varies as well on decadal periods of time,
changing by a factor of five or more from one 11-year cycle to the next, when
measured in terms of the numbers of sunspots seen on the Sun in the years
around the maximum of each solar cycle. There are weak cycles and strong
cycles, and prolonged periods in which the cycles are (1) persistently stronger
(as during much of the last century); (2) weaker (as in the first three decades
of the 19th century and at the turn of the 20th); and (3) almost but not quite
absent altogether (as during the 70-year period that ended in 1715.) There is
also some evidence of a longer solar activity cycle of about 80 years and another
of more than a thousand years.
What is still not known and needs to be found is the extent to which these
longer-term changes in solar behavior—spanning periods counted in decades
to centuries—affect the total energy that the Sun emits, since the period for
which we have actual measurements is as yet so short.
Precision radiometric measurements of the total heat and light and other
radiation received from the Sun can be made only from above the Earth’s
atmosphere. This technically-challenging task was initiated on a continuing
basis in 1978 and has been sustained since that time by a series of dedicated
instruments on different solar spacecraft. When properly intercalibrated and
pieced together, these invaluable data provide a continuous day-to-day record of
the Sun’s most vital sign which now extends for more than a quarter-century.

100

a) Spectral Irradiance

100

1

1

10-2

.01

10-4

.0001

b) Spectral Irradiance Variability

10,000

60μ
80μ
100μ

40μ

20μ

Far Infrared

4μ
6μ
8μ
10μ

2μ

Near Infrared

6000
8000 Å
1μ

4000

Near
UV VIS
2000 Å

Extreme UV
600
800
1000

200

100 Å

Xray

11-Year Cycle Variation (%)

10,000

Sun
10,000°F Object

102

400

Irradiance (mW/m2/nm)

104

Derived from Observations
Estimated
Level of Total Irradiance
Variation

1,000
100
10
1
0.1
10

100

1,000
Wavelength (nm)

10,000

100,000

The spectral distribution of solar radiation and its variablility. (a) Upper figure: Red line: the amount of
solar electromagnetic radiation in different wavelengths that falls on the top of the Earth’s atmosphere,
expressed in milliwatts per square per nanometer wavelength, compared with the relative amount of
radiation (dashed blue line) expected from an ideal radiator at a temperature equal to that of the Sun’s
visible, photospheric surface. The excess solar radiation seen at the shortest wavelengths originates in
higher regions of the solar atmosphere (chromosphere and corona) where the temperature is much higher.
(b) Lower figure: the percentage variability of solar radiation in these wavelengths. In the visible and nearinfrared spectrum the variation is at most about 0.1%, and only slightly more in the far infrared. The
greatest variation is not surprisingly found in the short-wave radiation that emanates from the Sun’s more
volatile upper atmosphere. There the variation is several percent in the near-ultraviolet, 100% in most
of the extreme ultraviolet and x-ray region, and up to more than 1000% in narrow wavelength regions
corresponding to the wavelength-specific radiation (called spectral emission lines) of highly-ionized
atoms, such as the very strong emission line at a wavelength of 30.4 nanometers (or 304 Ångstroms)
coming from ionized helium.

101
Back to Table of Contents

Variability in Different Parts of the Spectrum

M

ore than 90% of all the energy that leaves the Sun comes to us in the visible
and near-infrared regions of the spectrum, in the form of light and solar heat.
Both of these two components vary in step and in phase with changing solar
activity: changing by at most a few tenths of a percent in day-to-day excursions
and more slowly and systematically in the course of the 11-year solar cycle.
Though small in terms of other climate modulators—such as cloud cover—
that more forcibly and more randomly alter the amount of radiation received
at the Earth’s surface, these more persistent changes in external solar forcing
are sufficient to leave discernible, 11-year marks on the surface temperature of
both the lower atmosphere and the oceans.
Slightly less than 10% of the Sun’s total output of energy comes to us in the
form of near-ultraviolet radiation, which dictates the production of ozone
and through that process heats the stratosphere. Since it originates at a higher
and more active level in the Sun’s atmosphere, solar radiation in this invisible
part of the spectrum is more variable than the visible and near-infrared parts.
Its response to changes in magnetic activity on the Sun is also much greater,
varying by as much as 10%.
In addition, the photons that carry radiation in the near-ultraviolet are
considerably more energetic and as such are potentially hazardous to life: with
the potential of immediate damage to our eyes, skin and other human tissue,
and more subtly to our immune system. Although most of the solar nearultraviolet radiation incident upon the Earth is absorbed by ozone, a small
fraction—more at higher altitudes and at lower latitudes—slips by the ozone
filter in the sky and makes its way to the surface of the Earth to do its damage
to those exposed.
The extreme ultraviolet (EUV) and x-ray radiation from the Sun arises from
the progressively higher temperatures of the upper chromosphere, transition
zone and corona. The structure and make-up of these upper reaches of the Sun
are highly variable, as is the EUV and x-ray radiation from the Sun as a whole,
fluctuating by an order of magnitude or more.
Solar EUV and x-ray radiation are also far more energetic than the nearultraviolet and potentially more lethal. And even though these most energetic
rays make up but one ten-thousandth of the total energy emitted by the Sun,
they are sufficient to exert almost complete control of the thermosphere and
the ionosphere.

102

SOLAR ENERGY RECEIVED AT THE EARTH
FORM

total irradiance
Near infrared
Visible
Near-ultraviolet
Far-infrared
Far-ultraviolet
EUV and x-ray
PARTICLES
Solar protons
Solar wind particles
Galactic cosmic rays

TOTAL
ENERGY
IN WATTS PER
ACRE AT THE
TOP OF THE
ATMOSPHERE

FRACTION
THAT
REACHES
THE
SURFACE

5500
2800
2200
490
10
.5
.2

60%
55%
75%
40%
20%
0
0

FRACTION
OF
TOTAL
ENERGY
RECEIVED

VARIABILITY

~100%
51%
40%
9%
0.14%
0.01%
0.005%

0.1%
0.05%
0.1%
1%
0.1%
15%
up to 200%

0.002

negligible

up to x100

0.0003

negligible

up to x30

negligible

20% due to solar
modulation

0.000006

The Sun sends out radio waves as well, and in all directions, which can be
clearly heard using a directed antenna as crackling static across the full span of
the radio frequency spectrum. But the radio emission from the Sun is of little
consequence in terms of direct terrestrial impacts since it carries so little energy,
even during explosive flares, when the Sun’s radio emission increases by many
orders of magnitude. What the Sun emits in these very long wavelengths is,
nevertheless, of considerable value as a diagnostic tool for remotely probing
and monitoring the solar corona and transition zone, where radio frequency
radiation originates, and as an alternate index of solar activity.
The largest spikes in the near-ultraviolet, EUV and x-ray radiation from the
Sun come from the eruption of explosive solar flares, in which concentrated
magnetic energy is suddenly and catastrophically converted into heat and light
and short-wave radiation.
At these times the flaring region on the solar disk brightens dramatically in all
parts of the spectrum, with the greatest increase in the shortest wavelengths. In
EUV and x-ray radiation the burst of radiation is so intense that it dramatically
increases the total radiation in these wavelengths received from the entire disk.
In white, visible light this is almost never the case, and when it does—during
the very rare occasions when a so-called white-light flare occurs—the brief
increase in the total visible radiation from the Sun is no more than 1%.
Although the energy released at the site of the flare can equal the detonation
of a tightly-clustered pack of 100,000 atomic bombs, the direct effect on the
total amount of solar energy received at the Earth—a very small target at a
103
Back to Table of Contents

very great distance—is to add, but briefly, about four watts to the more than
5540 kilowatts per acre that the Sun continually deposits in the form of light
and heat.

Effects of the Sun’s Rotation

T

he 27-day rotation of the solar surface has no effect on the total amount
of radiation the Sun sends outward in all directions. But it plays a major role
in modulating the amount the Earth receives by exposing us each day to a
different part of the variegated surface of the radiating photosphere.
Were the Sun to spin much more slowly and, like the Moon, keep the same half
of its surface turned always toward us, the energy we receive would still vary in
response to both eruptive events and the birth and evolution of sunspots and
faculae, which come and go in matters of days to weeks.
Solar rotation superposes on these intrinsic solar changes a more rapid and
complex modulation, as new and different patchworks of sunspots and faculae
are rotated into and then out of our view. In the process the Sun rolls out for
us a panoramic display of its entire surface, continually updated and repeated
for us—should we have missed all or part of the first show—fourteen times
each year.
Were we unable to see the surface of the Sun we could still determine its average
rate of rotation from ongoing observations of solar radiation received at the
Earth in the energetic ultraviolet. As long-lived active regions are repeatedly
carried across the face of the Sun by solar rotation these short-wave hotspots
on the visible disk would appear in a recording of ultraviolet flux from the Sun
like a sweeping beam of light from a lighthouse.
The effect on the ultraviolet radiation we receive introduces a related 27-day
modulation in the amount of ozone in the stratosphere, which is largely
controlled by short-wave solar radiation.
				
The marks of solar rotation are also seen in continuous measurements of the
total solar irradiance during the passage of large sunspots across the solar disk.
A large sunspot coming into view at the eastern or left-hand limb of the Sun
will first appear very much flattened in one dimension due to the spherical
shape of the Sun. If the spot is circular, it will first appear to us in a telescope as
104

a dark vertical line, and in succeeding days, as more and more of its true area is
turned toward us, as a flattened oval. As it moves with the Sun’s rotation across
the face of the Sun we are shown more of its true shape and size, which are fully
revealed only when the sunspot reaches the central portion of the solar disk.
This imposed “foreshortening” effect can be quite evident in the record of
total solar irradiance during the time that a large sunspot is carried by rotation
across the face of the Sun. The amount of energy a sunspot takes from the
total solar energy received at the Earth is proportional to its projected area on
the solar disk: greatest when the spot reaches the central region of the disk
and least when it lies near either limb. Thus as it is carried across the Sun by
solar rotation a single large sunspot or sunspot group will often appear as a
distinctive V-shaped notch in a continuous record of total solar irradiance.

Effects of the Earth’s Orbit

A number of other influences, unrelated to the Sun itself, alter both the total

amount of solar radiation the Earth receives, and how it is distributed over the
spherical surface of the planet. Some of these, arising from the non-circularity
of the Earth’s orbit and a congenital tilt in its axis of rotation, continually
modulate the amount of solar energy that arrives on any day, and any place.
Others, such as atmospheric absorption and reflection from clouds and
aerosols—the middlemen in the radiative transfer business—take their often
heavy cut from the amount that enters the top of the atmosphere as it streams
downward toward the surface of the Earth. In the end, only about half of the
all the energy that the Sun delivers on our doorstep—at the very top of the
atmosphere—will ever make it to the ground.

				
The fact that the rotational axis about which the Earth spins is not exactly
perpendicular to the plane in which our planet circles the Sun introduces a
dramatic annual modulation in the solar energy we receive. This considerable
imperfection tilts the Earth’s North and South Poles for half of the year toward
the Sun and for the other half away from it. This produces a regular change
in the height to which the Sun climbs each day in the sky, and through this a
smooth annual variation in the number of hours of sunshine. From this tilt in
the Earth’s rotational axis come the seasonal rhythms which for eons have so
strongly directed the course of life on the planet.
The magnitude of these seasonal changes obviously depends on one’s latitude
and the angle—currently 23½°—at which the Earth’s axis is tilted. But unlike
105
Back to Table of Contents

the globes on our desks and tables, the angle of inclination of the real Earth was
not permanently fixed at The Factory.
The tilt of the actual, spinning Earth is nudged toward larger or smaller angles
of inclination by the combined gravitational pulls of the other planets and the
Moon. Because these change with time, the tilt angle slowly oscillates back and
forth between limits of 22 and 25°, completing a full cycle in about 41,000
years. This too, has important climatic impacts since it affects how incident
solar energy is apportioned over the spherical Earth.
				
Similarly, although we often think of the Earth’s orbit as circular, the path we
actually follow in our annual trip around the Sun is in truth slightly elliptical:
an oval, not a circle, which in the present era takes us about 3 million miles
nearer to the Sun at closest approach than half a year later, when we are farthest
away. This annual variation of about 3% in the distance that solar radiation
must travel to get to us—which ranges from 91½ to 94½ million miles—
produces an annual modulation of almost 7% in the total radiation the Earth
receives: an annual change that is a hundred times larger than any variation of
purely solar origin.
The elliptical shape of our orbit is another consequence of the gravitational pulls
of the Moon and the other planets on our own movement around the Sun. At
present, the eccentricity or non-circularity the Earth’s orbit—a measure of its
departure from a perfect circle—is slightly less than 2%. But this, too, slowly
varies with time, oscillating in the course of about 100 thousand years between
nearly zero (when for a limited time our orbit is indeed a divinely perfectly
circle) to an upper limit of about 6%.
				
The climatological impact of variable eccentricity is much affected by a third
significant variable of our orbit about the Sun: namely, the times of the year
when the elliptical path takes us closest to our parent star, and farthest away.
These times of maximum and minimum intensity can fall in any part of the
calendar, and do, following a cycle of about 22 thousand years. Like the other
perturbations, it too is dictated by the changing pulls of the other planets and
the Moon as these other bodies trace out their own celestially imperfect orbits.
In the present era the Sun is closest to the Earth in January and farthest in July.
Thus the effect on the Northern hemisphere is to dilute, somewhat, the intensity
of the seasonal changes that follow from the tilt of the Earth’s axis. In the Southern
106

hemisphere, approaching closer to the Sun in January (there, in early summer)
and farther from it in July (in winter) has quite the opposite effect.
In the Southern Hemisphere the impact on seasonal climate of turning up the
heat in summer and turning it down in winter is at present not as severe as in
the Northern Hemisphere. There the effect is appreciably dampened by the
current placement of the ever-drifting continents: specifically, the happenstance
in the present era of more extensive oceans in the Southern hemisphere and the
presence at the South Pole of a very large ice-covered continent, both of which
provide thermal inertia.
				
These slow and subtle changes in the orbit and inclination of our planet—known
as the Milankovitch effect—act together to reapportion in time and reallocate
in space the continuous flow of energy that the Sun delivers to the Earth. And
though small in absolute terms, the internally-amplified climatic impacts of these
changes appear to be sufficient to have served as a pacemaker for the coming
and going of the major Ice Ages throughout the last million years of Earth
history, as revealed in repeated patterns of ocean temperature obtained by paleooceanographers from the analysis of deep-sea cores.

Lost in Transit: The Fate of Solar Radiation
in the Earth’s Atmosphere

All else that modulates the amount of solar radiation that streams down upon

the Earth—including all variability at the source itself and all short and longterm consequences of our orbit about the Sun—is dwarfed by what happens in
the atmosphere itself: in but the last few hundred miles of a long, long journey.
In its passage from the top to the bottom of the ocean of air, only a little more
than half of the solar energy that falls upon the upper atmosphere will reach
the solid surface and oceans of the Earth. The rest will be consumed as it speeds
downward through the air, or reflected back towards the Sun.
About 30% of all solar radiation that arrives at the top of the atmosphere is
immediately rejected by the planet and returned, unused, back into the dark of
space: reflected mostly in the lower atmosphere by clouds and other suspended
particles or at the surface by highly reflective water, ice and snow and different
types of land cover.
The remaining 70% is put to use: the sum of the 50% that is absorbed by
the surface to directly heat the planet and 20% that is selectively absorbed
107
Back to Table of Contents

by atoms and molecules of air, mostly high in the atmosphere, or selectively
scattered in the lower atmosphere to illuminate and color the sky. Included
in the 70% is all the energy in the x-ray and extreme ultraviolet region of the
spectrum, which is absorbed in the thermosphere and mesosphere; almost all
of the near-ultraviolet, absorbed by ozone in the stratosphere and troposphere;
and some of the infrared, absorbed in the same region by water vapor, carbon
dioxide and the other molecular greenhouse gases.
All of these deductions vary from place to place and on all scales of time, as
they together reduce and modulate the solar energy that ultimately reaches us
at the bottom of the ocean of air.

108

109
Back to Table of Contents

The birth of a coronal mass ejection, July 2005. The rapidly expanding blob, lower right, of what was once a well-formed coronal
streamer (like that at upper left) is propelled outward, faster than a speeding bullet, into the heliosphere. This image of the Sun’s
outer corona was made in white-light by a continuously-operating coronagraph on the SOHO spacecraft. The inner image of the
chromosphere, which identifies the relevant magnetically-active regions on the underlying surface of the Sun, was made at the
same time and on the same spacecraft in the far ultraviolet. It has here been overlaid, to scale and properly oriented, on the black
occulting disk of the corona, which blocks the solar disk and inner corona from our view. Violent CMEs of this kind are quite
separate from the far gentler outward flow of less energetic particles that pour continuously outward from all parts of the Sun in
the solar wind.

VARIATION IN THE FLOW OF
PARTICLES AT THE EARTH
The Nature of Arriving Particles

E

ach atomic particle that leaves the Sun—in the solar wind, in CMEs, or
from solar flares—is a small piece of the star itself, taken chiefly from the
corona and transition zone. Because of the extremely high temperatures in
these source regions, the atoms that escape the Sun have lost most or all of their
electrons, yielding positively-charged ions and negatively charged electrons. For
hydrogen—which is far and away the most abundant element on the Sun—the
products of ionization are simply protons and freed electrons. For helium, the
next abundant, and for all the other elements the products are free electrons
and ions of different positive charges.
These newly-released particles, since they carry an electric charge, are at once
bound to the strong magnetic lines of force that thread the solar atmosphere.
Particles that leave the Sun in the solar wind carry these embedded magnetic
fields with them: like missionaries sent on their way with bibles in hand. An
assemblage of charged particles of this sort describe a state of matter—called
plasma (a gas composed of ionized or charged particles)—whose behavior is
quite different from that of the more familiar gaseous, solid, and liquid states
of matter. One of these differences is the capability of retaining an imbedded
or “frozen in” magnetic field.
The combination of charge and embedded field in solar plasma very much
affects what happens when the ejected plasma comes in contact with the
magnetic fields of the Earth or other planets.
Depending upon their energies, solar particles that arrive at the Earth produce
quite different impacts. The least energetic are the solar wind plasmas, in either
slow- or high-speed streams, as well as most particles carried Earthward in
CMEs, which in either case consist of weaker, thermal electrons and ions. Their
energies per particle (expressed in electron-volts, or eV) tell of the temperature
in their region of origin in the chromosphere, transition zone, and corona of
the Sun, and range from a few eV for electrons to at most at few keV (“kilo” or
1000 electron volts) for protons and other ions.
Highly accelerated (or suprathermal) particles include protons and other ions
expelled more impulsively from flares and more commonly, particles in the
111
Back to Table of Contents

solar wind plasma that have been accelerated en route to the Earth by fastmoving CMEs. The energies of flare particles are commonly in the range of
MeV (millions of electron volts).
It is the considerable energy of these accelerated, suprathermal particles that
produces significant terrestrial impacts and effects. These effects include, among
others, splitting atoms and molecules apart in our upper atmosphere; creating
and sustaining the Earth’s ionosphere; and imposing direct hazards to human
passengers in either air or spacecraft.
Galactic cosmic ray particles are more energetic, with typical particle energies
in the GeV (“giga” or 109 electron volts) range, although their range of energies
spans twelve orders of magnitude. Some of these incoming alien particles
are endowed with energies so awesome—up to 1020, or a hundred billion
billion, electron volts per particle—that for most practical purposes they are
unstoppable.
The speed of solar particles—a function of their mass and kinetic energy and in
the case of the solar wind, the bulk motion of the plasma—also covers a wide
range. A solar wind electron with an energy of 10 eV travels at a characteristic
speed of about 1000 miles per second, to arrive at the Earth in a little less than
a week. An energetic proton from a solar flare with an energy of 109 eV will
travel a thousand times faster—at half the speed of light—covering the same
vast distance in but 15 minutes. And because the proton is so much heavier, its
potential impact on the Earth is immensely greater.
A stream of solar protons with energies in the range of 109 eV and moving
at this near-relativistic speed constitutes a potentially fatal threat to anyone
outside the atmosphere who should happen to cross its path, and as noted
earlier, an almost unavoidable one, for they can penetrate four inches of lead.
Energies and Corresponding Temperatures of
Solar Atomic Particles
PARTICLE ENERGY IN
ELECTRON VOLTS

CORRESPONDING
TEMPERATURE (OF)

TYPICAL SOURCE
REGION

0.5

10,000

Solar photosphere

1

20,000

Low chromosphere

10

200,000

100 eV to 1 keV
MeV to GeV

Transition zone
7

10 to 10

Corona

13

10 to 10

Solar flares

6

18

112

Solar Sources

Energetic atomic particles from the Sun begin their outward journeys from

a variety of starting points in the solar atmosphere: some from eruptive
prominences and active regions; some from coronal holes; and others from
long coronal streamers. Some leave from low latitude regions on the Sun and
others from its poles. But in every case their point of origin and direction of
flow are defined by local characteristics in the Sun’s magnetic field.
The most energetic streams of particles that reach the Earth arrive from either
explosive solar flares or more often, from shock waves created by fast CMEs in
the solar wind plasma. The energy that initiates and propels particles outward
from flares comes from the sudden conversion of some of the magnetic energy in
solar active regions into thermal and kinetic form. These short-term, impulsive
blasts of highly energetic particles are superposed on top of slower and less
energetic solar wind plasma.
What we sense at the Earth is a slowly-changing background of galactic cosmic
rays on which fast and slow streams of solar wind plasma are superposed. On
top of these are more sporadic episodes of higher energy particles that result
from solar flares and CMEs.
Solar Plasma and Energetic Particles that
Impinge upon the Earth
SOURCE

Origin

Types of particles

Solar Wind

Open field regions in the corona

Mostly protons and electrons

Closed field regions in the solar corona

Protons, electrons and ions

Solar corona and chromosphere

Protons, electrons and ions

Supernovae, neutron stars and
other galactic and extragalactic sources

Mostly protons, some ions and
electrons

CMES
Solar Flares
Galactic Cosmic
Rays

Particles Borne Outward in CMEs

E

jections of mass from the corona, called CMEs, are triggered by sudden
realignments and reconnections in the magnetic fields that give form to this
ethereal outer extension of the Sun. In the course of these violent events a long
coronal streamer of the sort that extend outward for millions of miles from
the surface of the Sun can be disrupted and rearranged, or wholly torn away.
Chromospheric prominences—which are often found within the bulbous base
of a coronal streamer and magnetically supported by it—are pulled up and
flung outward from the Sun in the same catastrophic disruption.
113
Back to Table of Contents

The expulsion of a CME can often be traced to differences in the rates of solar
rotation of adjoining latitude bands on the surface of the Sun. If one foot
point of a towering magnetic arch that supports the bulbous base of a coronal
streamer moves relative to the other one, it can twist the magnetic structure on
which the streamer is built, and sever its moorings to the Sun. The emergence
of new magnetic flux in the vicinity of a coronal streamer is another likely
trigger of CMEs.
By any measure, the dimensions of a CME are truly immense, and as they
move outward they continue to expand.
				
The expulsion of a CME from the Sun might correspond on Earth to suddenly
pulling up an entire forest of giant sequoias by their roots, and flinging them
outward like a handful of weeds into space. Or perhaps the sudden volcanic
obliteration of an entire island—as indeed happened off the tip of Sumatra one
summer day in 1883.
But neither simile is apt, for in the corona the disturbance is of continental
scale and often results in the violent obliteration of a sizeable piece of the
entire outer corona. What we chance to see from the Earth in these minutes
of unbridled solar rage are gigantic blobs of plasma, larger than the Sun itself,
hurled outward from the star at velocities of up to 1000 miles per second: an
almost unimaginable speed for so large an object, and fast enough to carry it
from LAX to JFK in but three seconds’ time. When the direction of an expelled
CME carries it toward the Earth, we can expect it to reach the outer boundary
of our magnetosphere in typically three to four days, although the fastest get
here in but 19 hours.
CMEs are expanding pieces of solar plasma containing protons, electrons, and
ions of different elements that are loosely bound together by the embedded
magnetic field that they have taken with them from the Sun. As noted earlier,
CME plasma is not particularly energetic, with energies per particle of but
a few keV, which are not unlike those encountered in the solar wind. But
higher speed CMEs can instigate shock waves in the solar wind through which
they pass, accelerating ambient wind and suprathermal particles to energies
measured in MeV. These high-energy, shock-driven particles generally run well
ahead of the CME that was responsible for them, and are the principal cause of
significant particle impacts at the Earth.
To be fully warned of their impending arrival, we need to have observed the
disruption as it happens on the Sun, which is best secured from satellite-borne
114

telescopes and coronagraphs. To tell whether it will strike the Earth we also
need to know its initial direction, bulk speed (as distinct from the speeds of
individual particles) and projected course. To forecast the likely consequences
at the Earth we need to know more about the CME, including its likely impact
on the slower-moving solar wind ahead of it and the polarity (north pointing
or south pointing) of the magnetic field in the approaching plasma.

Particles From Solar Flares

E

xplosive solar flares also release streams of highly energetic particles outward
toward the planets and into the heliosphere, although they are not the source
of the largest impacts at the Earth.
Like CMEs, solar flares represent the instantaneous conversion and release of
some of the magnetic energy contained in highly localized and magnetically
unstable regions on the Sun, and from the acceleration of these charged
particles in their passage through the outer solar atmosphere. Unlike CMEs,
however, much of the truly immense magnetic energy that is converted in a
flare is released as a short and intense burst of x-ray and EUV radiation.
Were our eyes able to see the disk of the Sun in the EUV and x-ray portion of
the solar spectrum we would need no telescope to tell us when and where on the
Sun a major flare occurred, which is not the case for visible radiation. As noted
earlier, for a few minutes at the start of a solar flare the localized brightening
in that one small area—seen in the light of x-ray and EUV radiation—would
appear so intense that it would far surpass the brightness of all the rest of the
solar disk.
Most of the atomic particles that are thrown off from a flare are electrons that
were separated from atoms of hydrogen, helium, iron and other chemical
elements in the hot chromosphere and corona. With them, though fewer in
number, are the ions that remained when the electrons were freed.
Of all flare particles, solar energetic protons (or SEPs) pose the greatest hazard
to both life and equipment in space, due to the combination of their mass
and speed. The fastest stream outward from the star at half the speed of light,
with energies per particle of tens of billions of electron volts. At these nearrelativistic speeds they can travel the 93 million miles to the Earth in about
fifteen minutes—about the time it might take us to eat breakfast.
Once within the Earth’s atmosphere, SEPs will spend most of their prodigious
energy in repeated collisions with atoms and molecules of air. But before that
happens they can pierce almost any metallic shield.
115
Back to Table of Contents

Manned space flights are particularly at risk, and especially those missions that
venture beyond the denser atmosphere and the bounds of the magnetosphere,
whether on a short trip to the Moon or a much longer journey to Mars,
and whether the crew is inside or outside the spacecraft. Nor would places
of apparent shade on the surface of these distant landing sites offer certain
protection, because the Sun throws curve balls.
				
Upon leaving it, charged particles closely follow extended magnetic field lines
that are curved into spiral form by solar rotation. At the Moon’s distance from
the Sun (the same as that of the Earth) the angle of arrival is tilted about
45° from the line of sight to the Sun, and on more distant Mars, about 55°.
Moreover, because of the way incoming charged particles are deflected or
“scattered” in all directions by the intervening medium, on the Moon or Mars
as elsewhere in space there are as many solar particles arriving from the antisolar direction as from the opposite, Sun-facing direction.
Given these circumstances, finding shelter may not be easy. Moreover, to take
full advantage of the few available minutes of warning time, observers on the
Earth must have witnessed the initial burst of the flare, recognized its severity
and reacted quickly to sound the alarm.
The best hopes for extending the warning time for these major solar events are
through more accurate predictions, issued as far in advance as possible, of when
and where on the Sun a CME or major flare is likely to occur; or to avoid all
manned spaceflight beyond the magnetosphere during the five or six years of
maximum activity in the 11-year solar activity cycle, which is when the most
CMEs and largest flares are most likely to occur.
Galactic cosmic rays are a horse of a different color. While there is hope
of minimizing the effects of solar high-energy particle events through a
combination of shielding and forewarning, galactic cosmic rays—due to both
their extreme energies and omnipresence—present a far more difficult and as
yet unsolved problem. In terms of cosmic ray exposure, the opposite option of
scheduling long-duration space flights during times of maximum solar activity,
when the flux of galactic cosmic rays in the inner heliosphere is significantly
reduced, may prove to be the better gamble.

116

The Solar Wind Plasma

The charged atomic particles that are carried away from the Sun in slow

or fast streams of solar wind plasma carry energies per particle of only about
one keV. But they flow outward from the star every minute of every day and
through all seasons of the 11-year solar activity cycle, and are often accelerated
en route to the Earth.
Protons and other heavy particles in the solar wind can be accelerated by
faster moving CMEs to energies that can exceed those in flare-produced solar
energetic protons. Moreover, the threat of these CME-accelerated particles to
space travelers or space equipment is greater than that from solar flares, since
they last so much longer. Exposure to particles from flares extends typically
from a few minutes to half an hour, while an accelerated stream of solar wind
plasma can continue for a matter of days.
Particles in the solar wind plasma come from wherever there are open field lines
in the Sun’s corona: from the poles, the equator, and places in between, and in
so doing spray outward from the Sun in virtually all directions.
Many that leave the polar regions of the Sun are channeled by magnetic lines of
force that curve gracefully outward from the Sun toward lower solar latitudes.
Many of these and all that come from more equatorial latitudes will continue
outward into space on fixed, straight-line courses that take them into the realm
of the planets. As they proceed outward, the speeding plasma streams—initially
more compact—gradually expand into an ever-wider cone: like pellets from
the muzzle of a shotgun.
Eventually, they will fill every part of the immense heliosphere. But in the first
leg of their long outward race—as they pass the milestones that mark the orbits
of first Mercury, then Venus, Earth, Mars, and the more remote planets—the
individual streams remain largely separate and distinct: in spite of the pushing
and shoving that happens when they are overtaken by faster moving particles
in CMEs.
Only a miniscule fraction of what the Sun releases in the solar wind will
encounter the Earth or other planets, all of which are all small targets at great
distances. Seen from the Sun, the Earth would appear about as large as a ping
pong ball held up at the far end of a football field: more like a star than a
planet, and though perhaps as bright, only half as large as the planet Jupiter
appears to us.

117
Back to Table of Contents

Characteristics of Slow Solar Wind Streams

Slow-speed streams of solar wind plasma, made up of predominantly protons

and electrons and a much smaller number of heavier ions, move outward at
about 200 miles per second. On average they will arrive at the orbit of the
Earth in four to five days, and at Mars in about a week. As in faster solar wind
streams, the energies of individual electrons fall in the range of one to twenty
electron volts and for protons about 700 eV (0.7 keV) per particle. Apart from
this is the energy in the bulk motion of the slow-speed solar wind plasma,
which is derived from the average of individual particles.

The initial trajectory followed by slow-speed plasma is determined by the shape
and placement of individual streamers. Solar plasma coming from streamers
in or directed toward higher latitudes will expand outward in a direction that
is tilted upward from the plane of the Earth and other planets. The flow of
particles from a streamer whose base lies at lower solar latitudes, on or near the
Sun’s equator, will be roughly parallel to this plane. Since streamers are found
at low latitudes in all seasons of the 11-year solar cycle, the Earth is continually
bathed in the slow-speed solar wind, and less commonly in gusts of the highspeed wind.

High-Speed Solar Wind Streams

H

igh-speed streams of plasma in the solar wind race outward from low in
the corona at speeds of 350 to 550 miles per second that clearly distinguish
them from those in the slower wind. Both high- and low-speed streams of
plasma are present in the space that separates the Earth from the Sun, although
they cannot interpenetrate, for they follow magnetic field lines from different
regions on the Sun. As emphasized earlier, either slow or fast solar wind streams
can be disturbed by suprathermal particles which are carried outward from the
Sun in either flares or in CMEs. These can produce shock waves in the ambient
wind through which they pass, greatly accelerating some of the plasma.
At these higher velocities the high-speed solar wind plasma arrives at the orbit
of the Earth within 2 to 3 days and at Mars in 3 to 4. Energies per particle
are also somewhat greater: typically ten to thirty electron volts per particle as
opposed to a slow-speed average of about 10 eV. The bulk-flow properties of
the high-speed wind, though quite different for protons and electrons, are in
this case comparable to the thermal energies of the particles within it.
As noted earlier, high-speed streams can be traced to regions on the Sun—called
coronal holes—where the density is much lower than in the surrounding corona
118

and where there are no concentrated magnetic fields or coronal streamers.
These regions of open magnetic field lines offer a direct path for the escape of
high-speed solar wind plasma.
The coronal holes that persist the longest are found at the two poles of the
Sun, where they are present in all but the most active years of the solar cycle.
Other large coronal holes also appear in middle and lower latitudes on the Sun
when it is less active, separating large magnetically-active regions on the disk.
The result is a strong solar cycle effect in the solar latitudes where coronal holes
appear, and in the number of expected high-speed streams in the solar wind.
				
When the Sun is totally eclipsed and its poles are sufficiently clear of highlatitude coronal streamers—as in years of minimum activity—we can actually
see the high-speed streams of plasma that flow radially outward from the poles.
They appear as a crown of slender white coronal plumes, made visible to us by
the same process that illuminates all the rest of the corona: namely, the scattering
or redirection of white light from the photosphere by coronal electrons.

Sectors in the Sun’s Extended Magnetic Field

The open magnetic field lines that are carried in the solar wind plasma are

drawn outward from the star like trailing ribbons with one end still attached
to the Sun. Plasma streams move outward from the Sun along radial lines. But
because they are tethered to the star, the magnetic field lines that trail behind
them are wound around the Sun in loose spirals by solar rotation, like the spiral
arms of a rotating galaxy.
The magnetic signature carried outward in each expanding stream is impressed
upon it at its place of origin on the Sun. As a result, the magnetic properties
of the expanding solar wind at low latitudes are divided into discrete segments
of common polarity called sectors. Some have originated in regions of
predominantly “outward pointing” polarity on the Sun, and others in places of
predominantly “inward pointing.”
Since these sources are commonly traced to adjoining regions of opposite
magnetic polarity, the solar wind streams emanating from them expand outward
in adjoining, oppositely polarized sectors. As these curved sectors, fixed at the
Sun and rotating with it, sweep by the Earth—like the sprays from a revolving
lawn sprinkler—the polarity of the interplanetary magnetic field sensed at the
Earth will switch from one polarity to the other each time a sector boundary
sweeps by.
119
Back to Table of Contents

Orbit Number 1

20 December
0300

1 December
0300

STORM
2 December
2117

SUN

4 December
2100

12 December
1200

A schematic representation of the Sun, rotating counterclockwise as seen from above its north rotational
pole, and the magnetic characteristics of the solar wind that flows outward from it. Particles coming
from extended regions of prevailing positive or negative magnetic polarity on its surface carry the local
dominant polarity with them, forming magnetic sectors of like sign, four of which are shown in this
example. This causes the magnetic polarity of the wind received at the orbit of the Earth to switch from
prevailing positive (indicated here from actual dated measurement by blue + signs with red outward
directed arrows and blue negative -, with red inward directed arrows) as the boundaries of the sectors are
swept by the Sun’s rotation past the Earth. The curved form of the sectors and of the tethered magnetic
field lines carried within them results from the combination of solar rotation and the radial outward flow
of the solar wind.

By the time the solar wind plasma reaches the orbit of Venus—about ¾ as far
from the Sun as we—the rotation-induced curvature in the sectors has turned
the direction of their original magnetic polarity through about 30°. Farther on,
at the orbit of the Earth the angle is more nearly 45°.
Although the plasma particles are carried radially outward from the Sun, the
location from which they came is carried by solar rotation east-to-west (left to
right) across the face of the Sun during the time of their outward travel. Due
to this effect, streams of plasma emitted from solar features that are near the
apparent central meridian of the solar disk will curve away from the Sun-Earth
line as they move outward, and will ultimately miss the Earth. It is not until the
rotation of the Sun has carried an active region several days westward—to an
120

B
A

ed

to

Pa r

t i cl

the R

tta

che

es E

d to

Particles Emitte

mitte

m
d fro

S
d from a Different

t he

S

on

e

ch

eA

B

Lin

ta

e So

Fie

ld
At

Lin

am

Fi e

red

red

ld

ota ting Sun

urce Region A

Rotating
Sun

e
Teth

Tethe

t By
Parker Spi
ral Traced Ou

C

our

c

e
eR

gio

n

The curving magnetic field lines, tethered at the rotating solar surface, which are carried outward in the
solar wind from three source regions (A, B, or C in this schematic drawing), generate the abiding heliacal
form of the Sun’s extended magnetic field. Blue arrows indicate the always-radial direction of the wind
front as it progressed outward.

apparent solar longitude of about 45° west—that it is in a position from which
plasma expelled from it is most likely to strike our planet.

Pushing and Shoving on the Way to the Earth

O

utward moving plasma in fast- and slow-speed solar wind streams can
interact mutually, slowing the fast wind and speeding up the slow. But as noted
earlier the more telling disruptions on their way to the Earth occur when these
plasma streams in the solar wind are overtaken by more energetic particles from
CMEs and less often, from solar flares.
In these cases the CME or flare particles, which move much faster than the
overtaken plasma, produce transient disturbances in the solar wind that, in
121
Back to Table of Contents

turn, can provoke large geomagnetic storms on the Earth, with impacts on life
and society.
A typical disturbance of this kind will abruptly raise the bulk flow speed in the
solar wind plasma from perhaps 200 to 600 or more miles per second. This
produces a region of high pressure on the leading edge of the disturbance that
is bounded by a forward-moving shock wave that compresses and heats the
solar wind plasma. Shock-acceleration in the solar wind plasma produces flows
of very high energy particles which are responsible for the longest-duration
and terrestrially most significant SEP events.

When Solar Particles Strike the Earth

Streams of solar wind plasma that come upon the Earth are initially deflected

by pressure forces at the magnetospheric bow shock and soon after, at the
magnetosphere itself. Nevertheless, a number of these fleeing particles from the
Sun—depending on the magnetic polarity and energy of the incoming plasma,
its speed, and where it comes in contact with the magnetosphere—will still find
their way through or around these barriers.
The passing hordes that are wholly deflected around the Earth still leave their
mark on the planet by distorting and distending the shape of the magnetosphere,
which ultimately affects conditions at the surface of the Earth.
To streams of approaching plasma, the Earth’s magnetosphere presents
an obstacle much like a protruding stone in the middle of a tumbling
mountain stream.

When solar wind plasma moving at supersonic speed encounters an obstacle like
the planet Earth it develops ahead of its path a dense and abrupt compression
called a shock wave through which the solar plasma must pass. The same is true
in a more familiar instance, when the object is moving and the fluid is fixed,
as when—accompanied by an audible sonic boom—an accelerating jet aircraft
exceeds the speed of sound.
			
In the case of the solar wind and the Earth, the obstacle is not the solid planet
itself, but the lines of force of its magnetosphere. To streams of charged atomic
particles moving at supersonic speeds these present an equally disturbing
122

obstacle, since the two magnetic fields—one from the Sun, the other at the
Earth—cannot interpenetrate.
The shock wave produced at this encounter is called the bow shock of the
magnetosphere, due to its similarity to the bow wave that forms in the water
ahead of the bow a moving ship. In the nautical case, the wave is formed not
where the sharp edge of the bow slices the water but some distance ahead of it.
In the same way, the bow shock in the solar wind is created well ahead of the
outer boundary of the magnetosphere and at a great distance from the Earth
itself. Depending upon the speed and energy of the approaching solar wind,
the bow shock is met typically 50,000 miles ahead of the Sun-facing side of
the Earth, and sometimes as far as 80,000 miles, or as much as a third of the
distance to the Moon.

In passing through the curved bow shock—a zone of turbulence often less than
100 miles thick—the onrushing solar plasma is heated, slowed to sonic speeds
and deflected.

The next obstacle it will encounter is the magnetopause, the shell or outer
boundary of the Earth’s magnetic field, which lies roughly half-way between
the bow shock and the solid Earth. Even there, the streaming plasma still has
about 40,000 miles yet to go to reach the planet itself.

As it approaches this second barricade, the onrushing plasma compresses
the curved lines of force that connect the two magnetic poles of the planet,
flattening the shape of the Sun-facing side of the magnetosphere and pushing
the magnetopause closer to the surface of the planet it protects.

123
Back to Table of Contents

Because the Earth’s magnetic field is so much stronger than that carried in
the oncoming solar plasma, it repels the brunt of the surge. Under normal
conditions the deflected solar plasma is channeled around the magnetopause to
continue its course, like a diverted stream, on beyond the Earth.

Through the Guarded Gates

H

owever, should the magnetic polarity in the stream of incoming solar
particles be oriented such that a significant component is directed opposite
to that of the Earth—that is, south-pointing instead of north-pointing—the
transported solar field and that of the Earth can directly connect to each other.
This process of magnetic reconnection on the day-side of the magnetosphere
opens the normally closed magnetopause, allowing the direct entry of charged
particles from the Sun into the Earth’s magnetosphere and on down into the
thermosphere.
The reconnection process creates open field lines, rooted at one end near the
poles of the Earth, that thread the magnetosphere, affording paths of access for
the newly admitted particles. In so doing, they temporarily expand the diameter
of the polar cusps, enlarging the funnel-shaped openings at the Earth’s magnetic
poles, thereby increasing the area through which diverted solar plasma moving
through the magnetosheath can flow into the magnetosphere.
The momentum of the solar wind drags the open field lines rooted at the two
poles of the Earth downwind into a long cylindrical magnetotail, made up of
a north lobe and a south lobe, each D-shaped in cross section, and stacked
back-to-back . Since the field lines in one originate at the north magnetic
pole of the Earth and the other at the south, the lobes have opposite magnetic
polarity, and are separated like a sub sandwich by a thin slice of hot plasma
and weak magnetic field called a plasma sheet.

124

Closed Magnetosphere

opa
Magnet

use

Solar Wind

opa
Magnet

Open Magnetosphere

use

Solar Wind

Upper right: Lines of force of the Earth’s magnetic field, portraying with arrows their presently-fixed,
north-pointing direction of polarization. Field lines emanating from either magnetic pole connect with
the opposite pole, defining a closed magnetic field, as shown here. The field lines streaming out to the
right, “downwind” side in this figure are also closed, connecting with lines from the opposite pole but
at a distant point well beyond the limited portion of the Earth’s field shown here. At upper left: the
approaching solar wind that flattens the Earth’s field on the Sun-facing side. In this case it carries the
imprint of a similarly north-pointing magnetic field (red arrows) from the Sun’s surface. Since it is parallel
to that of the Earth no Sun-Earth connection is made.
Lower left: An approaching solar wind or other disturbances such as a CME that carries instead a southpointing magnetic signature. Lower right: the effect of this oppositely-directed field on the Earth’s
magnetosphere. Within a limited point near the Earth’s equator on its Sun-facing side, the direction
of the solar field is exactly opposite to that of the Earth, allowing a direct electric connection between
the two, through a process called magnetic reconnection. For a short time, this opens a gateway for the
transfer of charged particles from the Sun directly into the magnetosophere, where within the yellow
region, they follow terrestrial field lines into the upper atmosphere of the planet to produce a magnetic
storm with accompanying aurorae and potentially major disruptions at the Earth’s surface.

125
Back to Table of Contents

In the distant magnetotail, stretched-out field lines attached to the Earth’s
north magnetic pole are pinched by the force of the streaming plasma into
contact with those of the opposite magnetic polarity rooted in the south
magnetic pole. In these regions of contact—called neutral lines—solar plasma
that has streamed outward in the magnetosheath is able to enter the outer
magnetosphere and become entrapped. Once there it is channeled all the way
back to the Earth and into the inner magnetosphere and radiation belts.
There is a final means of entry into the magnetosphere, that is also highly
restricted: in this case for cosmic and solar particles (as opposed to plasma
streams) that are sufficiently energetic to breach the protective magnetopause.
When this happens these highly energetic particles make their way directly
into the upper and middle atmosphere, where they are ultimately stopped by
collisions with atoms and molecules of air. To qualify for brute force entry,
charged particles must carry very high energies—in the range of about 500 MeV
or more—which include both galactic cosmic rays and the most energetic solar
particles, such as solar energetic protons (SEPs). How deeply they penetrate
into the atmosphere is a function of their energy, their angle of approach and
the magnetic latitude at which they enter.

Magnetic Reconnection

As noted above, when the normally-closed magnetopause is for a time opened

by magnetic reconnection, it creates a network of open-ended field lines, with
one end rooted in the area of the Earth’s polar caps. This temporary opening
of the magnetopause allows the direct entry of solar particles into the lowlatitude, Sun-facing magnetosphere, as well as solar particles that have been
deflected around the Earth in the magnetosheath.
Those that enter the magnetopause at the site of magnetic reconnection are
directed along the open field lines toward one of the magnetic poles, where
some are funneled directly into the upper atmosphere through the polar cusps.
Some of the particles traveling around the outer boundary of the magnetosheath
also find their way through the polar cusps and into the atmosphere.
Others within the magnetosheath follow newly-opened field lines in the
magnetotail, where at one of several possible neutral lines they execute a U-turn
to head back in the direction from which they came, toward the Earth and into
the inner magnetosphere.
A near-Earth neutral line where this can happen is temporarily established
during magnetic reconnection at a distance of about 25 RE or 100 thousand
miles downwind from the planet. A more permanent and more heavily used
126

distant neutral line is located more than 300 thousand miles farther out in the
magnetotail, which puts it well beyond the orbit of the Moon.
The opening of the magnetopause during magnetic reconnection events
also allows an exchange of particles in the opposite direction: out of the
magnetosphere, through the magnetopause and into the magnetosheath where
they are returned, unused, back into interplanetary space.
During times of magnetic reconnection the magnetosphere extracts about 2%
of the incident energy of the solar wind, of which more than half is returned,
unused, to space. But even the small fraction that is retained—stored in the
magnetotail in the form of magnetic field energy—can have major impacts.
The connection can be maintained for hours or days, and during this time the
effects of the direct connection are felt throughout the length and breadth of
the entire magnetosphere and in the upper atmosphere of the Earth as well,
with significant effects on a range of human activities.
				
The orientation of the magnetic field borne in an approaching stream of solar
plasma can lie anywhere from opposite to that of the Earth’s field to completely
parallel to it, or any angle between these two extremes. As previously noted,
magnetic reconnection between the approaching solar field and that of the
Earth is possible when the fields are oriented oppositely, or more precisely,
when a significant component of the vector that describes the orientation of
the approaching solar field is exactly opposite to that of the Earth’s fixed field.
One of the two simplest cases can be envisioned as the coming together
of the shafts of two arrows
that are anti-parallel, or pointed in exactly
opposite directions. Under these conditions, or in the more likely case in
which a significant component of the solar field vector is anti-parallel to that
of the Earth, a direct connection is possible. But when the orientation of
the magnetic field in the incoming plasma stream is the same or largely the
same as the portion of the Earth’s field with which it comes in contact—i.e.,
with our schematic arrows pointed in the same direction
—a meaningful
connection is not possible.
				

127
Back to Table of Contents

The present orientation of the Earth’s magnetic field is by convention described
as “north pointing” in the sense that the direction of magnetic force at the
equator is from the south to the north magnetic pole
.
And so it has been, with no drastic change in polarity, since the time of the
last reversal, when early Stone Age people began to wander into what is now
Europe: three-quarters of a million years ago.
When the Earth’s magnetic field next reverses direction, from north-pointing
to south-pointing

, the opposite will apply.

Magnetic reconnection with incoming solar plasma will then take place only
when a component of the incoming solar field is oriented in the opposite “north
pointing” direction, although the change, once accomplished, will make no
difference in the frequency of magnetic reconnection events. Were we here at
that time, we would notice not the switch in polarity but a protracted period
between states: a period of magnetic confusion when the strength of the Earth’s
protective field will fall almost but not quite to zero.
				
The more-superficial surface magnetic field of the Sun also switches polarity,
though at a much faster rate, following a solar magnetic cycle that is twice
the length of the 11-year activity cycle. Toward the end of each 11-year cycle
the north and south magnetic poles of the Sun switch polarities, from “north
pointing” to “south pointing” or vice versa, and remain that way until the
end of that cycle and the beginning of the next, when they will switch again,
completing one 22-year solar magnetic cycle. Thus the Sun, so often invoked
as a symbol of stability and constancy, is the more skittish partner in the SunEarth system, having undergone more than 68,000 magnetic reversals since the
last time the Earth changed its magnetic mind, about 750,000 years ago.
The magnetic polarity carried in streams of plasma that reach the Earth is
determined not simply by the Sun’s 22-year magnetic cycle but by the polarity
of the local magnetic field in the part of an active region from which the plasma
originates, which can be either “north-pointing” or “south-pointing” at any
phase of the Sun’s 11- or 22-year cycles. Thus the magnetic orientation of
the heliospheric magnetic field sensed at the Earth is a continually varying
parameter, as a consequence of the presence of discrete regions of opposite
polarity on the surface of the Sun and its 27-day rotation.

128

SOME Distances expressed in units of the
Radius of the Earth
FROM THE CENTER OF THE EARTH TO:
Mean Sea Level
Peak of Mount Everest
Auroral Displays

(0

miles)

(5.5 miles)
(260 – 580 miles)

DISTANCE IN RE
[≈4000 MILES]
1
1.0014
1.05-1.08

Near-Earth Orbit

1.10

Geosynchronous Orbit

6.6

Magnetopause in the Direction of the Sun

10

Magnetopause above the N and S Poles

13

Bow Shock at the Nose of the Magnetosphere

15

Nearest Neutral Line in the Magnetotail

25

The Moon at Mean Distance

60

Farthest Neutral Line in the Magnetotail

≈ 100

End of the Magnetotail

> 1000

Venus at Closest Approach

6,400

Mars at Closest Approach

12,200

The SUN

23,500

Effects of Changes in the Earth’s Magnetic Field

The degree to which the magnetosphere can deflect incoming solar and cosmic
particles depends on its strength, the energies of the incoming particle, and
their direction of approach relative to the geometry of the Earth’s field lines.

Mercury’s magnetic field, for example, is about 100 times weaker than our
own. Because of this and the planet’s proximity to the Sun—more than twice
as close as we—its magnetic field is very highly compressed on the Sun-facing
side. As a result, it can hold off the pressure of solar wind plasma no farther
than about 1500 miles: a distance above the surface of the planet that is about
equal to its radius. This and Mercury’s lack of an atmosphere—which allows
a direct interaction between its magnetosphere and the solid surface of the
planet—permit easier access to incoming energetic particles.
The Earth’s field, on the other hand, is sufficiently strong and oriented in such
a way that most incoming particles are fended off—at a distance on the Sunfacing side of about 40,000 miles above the solid surface. But it hasn’t always
been that way, nor will it always be, for the strength and orientation of the
Earth’s magnetic field is always changing.
129
Back to Table of Contents

The locations of the Earth’s north and south magnetic poles wander as time
goes by, seldom if ever coinciding with the locations of the two rotational
poles. In the Arctic, the peripatetic north magnetic pole is today meandering
along near Melville Island in Canada’s Northwest Territories, some 800 miles
south of the North rotational pole: about the distance that separates Chicago
from New Orleans. And it continues to move at a speed of about one mile per
day, in response to changes in the internal dipole field of the planet.
				
Two corrections need be applied to correct the difference between what a magnetic
compass indicates as “north” and “true north” as defined by the direction to
the Earth’s rotational pole. The first of these corrects for the difference between
the positions of the north magnetic and north rotational poles and is called the
variation or magnetic declination: a correction that navigators and surveyors
routinely apply when using a magnetic compass. (The other, called the deviation,
is a local effect that arises from the presence of magnetized metal or ore in the
immediate vicinity of the compass itself.)
Since the variation changes from year to year and place to place with the meandering
of the poles, the correction for variation indicated on maps, navigational charts
and flight maps require frequent updating. Because aircraft commonly employ
magnetic compasses, the large Arabic numbers that are painted at each end of
airport runways (e.g., 12 to indicate a magnetic heading of 120°, or 30 for 300°)
must also be corrected and repainted from time to time.
				
A more significant change—in terms of its effect on the efficacy of our
magnetic shield—is a well-established long-period variation in the strength of
the Earth’s field.
Five hundred years ago, when wooden ships set sail from ports in the Old
World to explore the New, the strength of the magnetic field that kept their
compasses pointed north was about 15% stronger than it is today. And stronger
still 1300 years before that when, at about the time the Roman Empire reached
its greatest extent, the Earth’s magnetic field—after a long, three thousand year
climb—reached a peak strength that was almost 40% greater than today.
More dramatic than these several-thousand year variations in the strength of
the field are longer-spaced reversals in the polarities of the Earth’s two magnetic
poles: at which time the north and south magnetic poles exchange polarity,
though not exactly at the same time.
130

In the course of these slow and imperfectly synchronized events, the effective
strength of the Earth’s field—and with it, the protection afforded by our magnetic
shield—drops precipitously low, if not to zero, for long periods of time.
Repeated occurrences of magnetic reversals have been identified in
paleomagnetic records of the last 80 million years, separated by periods of
fixed direction that persist for about 100 thousand to almost one million years.
Although the recurrence and timing of these events is highly irregular, the next
reversal is widely conceded to be overdue, since the last one occurred in the
early Pleistocene epoch, about 750,000 years ago.

Cosmic Rays

The Earth is continually bombarded with charged atomic particles not only

from the Sun but from violent events—such as the eruption of a supernova—
that happen much farther away, either within our immense galaxy, the Milky
Way, or far beyond it. They are accelerated in the shock waves that inevitably
follow such cosmic explosions, and are known as cosmic rays, since at one time
all were thought to come from outside the solar system, in the broader universe,
or cosmos. More than 100 cosmic rays speed through every square foot of our
upper atmosphere each second of every day.
It was more recently found that while some, more properly called galactic
cosmic rays or GCRs, do indeed come directly to us from far away, another
class (initially called anomalous cosmic rays, or ACRs, and later, “pick-up
ions”) are born within the heliosphere.
ACRs are created when neutral atoms from the interstellar medium flow into
the outer heliosphere. Those that penetrate into the near-Sun vicinity are ionized
by solar short-wave radiation, and as charged particles are picked up by the
magnetic field carried in the solar wind and accelerated to high speeds in passing
through the termination shock. Some of these reach the Earth. There, they can
be distinguished from other, galactic cosmic ray particles that reach the Earth
by both lower particle energies and lower charge. ACRs are singly-charged ions
with but one missing electron; GCRs, in contrast, have typically been stripped
of all of their orbital electrons and carry a much higher positive charge.
Cosmic rays, whether ACRs or GCRs, are not “rays” at all—in the sense of rays
of electromagnetic radiation in visible, ultraviolet, or infrared wavelengths—
but ions: the same sorts of atomic particles that the Sun sends our way, all day,
every day in the solar wind, and more sporadically from flares and CMEs. About
90% of all cosmic rays are protons; roughly 9% are the positively-charged nuclei
131
Back to Table of Contents

of helium atoms (called alpha particles); and the remainder electrons and the
charged nuclei of heavier elements. Most GCRs can be readily distinguished
from particles of solar origin in that they are far more energetic.
GCRs that reach the near-Earth vicinity come in a wide range of energies.
In passing into and through the heliosphere only the most energetic—those
with energies greater than a few hundred MeV—are unaffected by heliospheric
processes that slow them down, reducing the energy of a GCR by several
hundred MeV during its passage through the heliosphere to the orbit of the
Earth. Thus, ordinary GCRs that are detected at the Earth—whether coming
from within our galaxy or beyond it—must have arrived at the boundary of the
heliosphere with higher energies than what we observe here.
By the same token, GCRs that come from beyond our galaxy must have started
their long journey with even greater energies. In order to slip through the
combined magnetic field of the stars and other objects in our galaxy these
intruders from truly distant worlds must begin their travels with energies
in the range of about 1020 electron volts per particle (100 million trillion
electron volts!). To these super-powered particles, breaching what are to them
the relatively weak defenses of the heliosphere, and soon after that, our even
weaker magnetosphere, must seem like a piece of cake.
THE PRICE OF ADMISSION IN ELECTRON VOLTS FOR
CHARGED ATOMIC PARTICLES
PURPOSE

Entry Into the Galaxy
Passage Into the
Inner Heliosphere

MINIMUM ENERGY
REQUIRED,
PER PARTICLE

IN GIGA (109)
ELECTRON
VOLTS

1020

1011 GeV

3 x 108

.3 GeV

GRATIS
108
1010

1 GeV
10 GeV

Unrestricted Entry Into the
Magnetosphere
• At the poles
• At mid latitudes
• At the equator

The Fate of Cosmic Rays

The microscopic examination of lunar rocks brought back to Earth by Apollo

astronauts has shown that through at least the last 100 million years (since
about the middle of the Cretaceous period of Earth history) the Moon has
132

been bombarded by high energy cosmic particles at about the same rate as
recorded on the Earth by neutron monitors today.
Since our close neighbor the Moon receives—per square foot—the same number
of cosmic rays that strike the top of the Earth’s atmosphere, this lunar finding
of past cosmic ray flux applies to the Earth as well. But with no magnetosphere
or atmosphere to buffer it, the Moon’s long pummeled surface takes the full
force of every solar or cosmic punch.
It is the Earth’s atmosphere and not the magnetosphere that shields the surface
of the Earth from the most energetic cosmic rays. Their energies are absorbed
in collisions with atoms and molecules in the Earth’s coating of protective air,
much as an arrow, or a bullet, shot into water soon loses its thrust. Those
cosmic rays that do make it to the surface are limited to the weaker, secondary
particles that were created near the end of a downward cascade of collisions
that started in the upper atmosphere.
Taking most of the hits are atoms and molecules of nitrogen and oxygen: the
most abundant constituents of the atmosphere, and these encounters are not
inconsequential. The collision of a speeding, high-energy cosmic ray with
a more lethargic atom or molecule is like the crash of a high-velocity bullet
against a crystal goblet.
In the course of each of these violent impacts, the impacted atoms of air are
shattered and torn asunder: producing a second generation of less energetic
subatomic particles, each of which carries away a portion of the energy imparted
by its parent cosmic ray. The heaviest and most energetic of the litter are protons
and neutrons. Electrons are also produced, as are short-lived muons and pions
that live for no more than a few microseconds.
These “daughter” or secondary cosmic ray particles extend the chain of collisions
downward into the middle atmosphere, and ultimately a few make it to the
ground. On the way down protons and neutrons soon suffer further collisions
with other atoms of air, resulting in a third generation of sub-atomic particles.
The protons and neutrons among these will in like manner generate a fourth
generation; and so on, until all of the energy brought into the atmosphere
by the parent primary cosmic ray has been spent: most of it—as with other
families well endowed—by heirs.
This process of energy depletion through repeated collisions and divisions
produces what is called a cosmic ray shower or cascade. They are initiated in
the upper atmosphere and through repeated cascades reach down into deeper
and denser layers of the atmosphere until the number of subatomic particles
that are produced reaches a maximum and then begins to decrease.
133
Back to Table of Contents

Maximum production is reached at an altitude of but ten or eleven miles
above the surface of the Earth: the very height at which the Concorde—like a
daredevil leaping through a wall of flame—made its fleeting trips. Below that,
as the atmosphere thickens, the generations of cosmic rays finally lose all their
punch, but barely in time to spare us and all the other bottom feeders in the
ocean of air in which we live.
Incoming
Cosmic Ray

π±

γ

eγ

e-

P

μ±

γ

e+
e-

e+
γ

P
n
π
e
μ
γ

ππ+

γ

Key:

n

π

P

n
P

πμ-

e+ e-

= Proton
= Neutron
= Pion
= Electron
= Muon
= Photon
= Atom

n
n
n

P
n

e+

n

n
n

P
n

P n
n
n

P

The shower of secondary atomic particles and radiation produced by the collision of a single incoming
cosmic ray (top, center) with an atom of oxygen or nitrogen (first yellow circle) in the upper atmosphere,
ultimately distributing the cosmic ray’s not inconsiderable energy among less energetic, stable and
unstable nuclear atomic particles, radiation in photons, and electrons. Here the initial impact releases
(right panel) a proton and neutron, each of which initiates further cascades by colliding with other
atoms of air (yellow circles.) Also released are less stable nuclear particles known as pions and muons
(middle panel) as well as electrons and electromagnetic radiation (left panel.)

Could we see one of these cosmic ray cascades unfold—high overhead on a
starry night—it would look much like the bursts and spreading trails of colored
light that elicit oohs and aahs during aerial displays of fireworks on the 4th of
July: although in this case each pyrotechnic display would last no longer than
the wink of an eye.
				

134

The flux of cosmic ray and solar particles that reach the Earth behave oppositely
and are very nearly mirror images of each other: when one is up the other is
down. When the Sun is more magnetically active and spotted, the number of
secondary cosmic ray neutrons that reach the Earth is reduced by about 20%.
When the Sun is less active, more are recorded. A repeated pattern of 22 years,
in step with the solar magnetic cycle, is also apparent in the Earth’s receipt of
cosmic rays as an alternation in the characteristic shape of successive 11-year
cycles of cosmic ray flux, apparent in plots of cosmic rays vs time. In plots of
cosmic ray incidence vs. time, 11-year cycles that reach a distinct peak alternate
with cycles that are flat-topped, i.e. exhibit a prolonged maximum.
The last maximum in the 11-year solar cycle was reached in 2001. Since then,
while the number of sunspots was gradually falling, year after year, the flux of
cosmic rays—recorded continuously by neutron monitors at high-altitude
stations in Colorado, Vermont, Antarctica and a host of other sites—reached a
cosmic ray maximum (and a sunspot minimum) in 2008.
Sunspots themselves have no direct effect on cosmic rays, but disturbances in
the flow of solar wind plasma do. For the most part, these can be traced to the
interaction between fast-moving CME plasma and the ambient solar wind,
which occur more often in years of maximum solar activity, since CMEs are
more energetic and more frequent then. At these times of greater turbulence,
incoming cosmic particles are more likely to be scattered and deterred from
reaching the Earth. When the Sun is less active the opposite is true.
Relative Number of High-energy Atomic Particles that
reach the Earth’s Magnetosphere
RECEIVED AT TIMES OF
MAXIMUM SOLAR
ACTIVITY

RECEIVED AT TIMES OF
MINIMUM ACTIVITY

From the Sun

More

Fewer

From the Cosmos

Fewer

More

SOURCE

We can also expect the Earth’s receipt of galactic cosmic rays to vary, periodically,
on a much slower scale as the Sun makes its orbit around the center of the
Galaxy: a circle so large that it takes almost 250 million years to complete a
single lap around it.

135
Back to Table of Contents

The longest record of cosmic ray flux at the Earth is taken from the analysis
cited earlier of lunar rocks brought back during the Apollo missions of the
1970s. From these rudimentary natural diaries one can infer that the flux of
galactic cosmic rays—with enough energy to leave their tracks on the face of
exposed lunar rocks—has not changed very much during the 100 million year
period (a little less than half a turn around our Galaxy) that is sampled in the
exposed material.

136

137
Back to Table of Contents

IMPACTS OF SOLAR
VARIABILITY
Solar Causes, Terrestrial Impacts, and
Societal Effects

Activity-related events on the Sun lead to societal consequences on the Earth
through a causal chain of solar events, their physical impacts on the Earth,
and the resultant effects of these impacts on human life and endeavor.

The initiating causes can be dynamic events at the Sun such as the expulsion
of a CME or the eruption of a flare, or through more gradual forcing factors
such as the Sun’s 27-day rotation and the year-by-year variation in the extent
of magnetic activity on the surface of the star. All of them impose variations—
which can be sudden and large—in the amount of energy the Sun releases into
space: in the intensity of electromagnetic radiation, the number and energies
of solar atomic particles, or most often, in both of these.
Among the solar-induced impacts on the Earth—or in the now heavily-trafficked
zone of space around it—are heightened levels of hazard in the near-Earth and
space environment; disruptions and storms in the Earth’s magnetosphere; the
generation of strong electric currents that thread the atmosphere from top to
bottom; changes in the ionosphere’s reflective properties and in the chemistry
of the stratosphere; and increased heating of the lower atmosphere, the surface
of the Earth and the oceans.
The effects we feel on Earth or in near-Earth space cover a broad scope of national,
commercial and personal activities and concerns. These range from satellite
telephone calls and the nightly news on television to spaceflight, the transfer
of electric power, national security, the transfer of financial and commercial
information, weather and climate, and human health and well-being.
Some of the impacts of solar variability on different regions of the Earth and
near-Earth space are summarized, with the solar cause of each of them, in the
accompanying table. They are then explained, individually, in the text that
follows it. A subsequent chart at the end of this section identifies some of
the human activities affected by each of these impacts. The specific societal
effects in each of these areas of human activity are covered, one by one, in the
next section.
139
Back to Table of Contents

IMPACTS OF SOLAR VARIABILITY ON THE EARTH AND NEAR-EARTH
SPACE AND THEIR CAUSES ON THE SUN
LOCATION

IMPACT
Greater flux of high-energy atomic particles
CAUSE: eruptions of solar flares and CME-driven shock waves and
the rise in their occurrence as solar activity increases

Near-Earth Space

Increase in highly-energetic EUV and x-ray radiation
CAUSE: eruptions of solar flares and an increase in
the level of solar activity
An 11-year cycle in the Earth’s receipt of galactic cosmic rays
CAUSE: effect of the 11-year variation in solar activity and its
impact on GCRs

Magnetosphere

Initiation of geomagnetic storms and sub-storms
CAUSE: transfer of energy from CME-driven shock waves; high-speed
streams of solar wind plasma and impulsive events on the Sun
Displays of the aurora
CAUSE: entry of high-energy particles from the Sun or from
the magnetosphere into the upper atmosphere, where they
strike atoms of oxygen and nitrogen, resulting in the emission
of visible radiation in discrete colors
Changes in the temperature and dynamics of the thermosphere
CAUSE: day-to-day and impulsive variations in the amount of
solar x-ray and ultraviolet radiation that is absorbed at this
level by neutral atoms of air

Upper
Atmosphere

Variability in the electrical properties of the atmosphere
CAUSE: the direct transfer of energy from the solar wind into the
magnetosphere, combined with impacts of high energy particles
from solar flares and CMEs. These generate and sustain electric
currents that couple the magnetosphere, thermosphere,
mesosphere and stratosphere together, with impacts on the
surface electric and magnetic field
Fluctuations in the concentration of free electrons in the ionosphere
CAUSE: changes in the Sun’s x-ray and extreme ultraviolet radiation
that is absorbed by neutral atoms of air in the thermosphere and
ionosphere to produce free electrons and charged ions in the
ionosphere
Changes in the abundance of ozone and other traces gases
in the stratosphere
CAUSE: fluctuations in solar ultraviolet radiation and high energy
atomic particles from solar flares
Changes in the temperature of the stratosphere
CAUSE: solar-driven fluctuations in ozone that affect the amount of solar
near-ultraviolet radiation that is absorbed at this level

Lower
Atmosphere,
Oceans, and
Land Surface

Changes in the temperature and other meteorological conditions
in the troposphere
CAUSE: persistent changes in the total and spectral radiation
received from the Sun, including the near-ultraviolet, which
by altering the amount of ozone in the stratosphere can affect
the transfer of radiation throughout the lower atmosphere
Changes in the surface and sub-surface temperature of the oceans
CAUSE: variability in total and spectral solar radiation, which is
absorbed within the topmost (photic) zone of the ocean, to a depth
of about 650 feet in the clearest water
Changes in the surface temperature of the solid Earth
CAUSE: variability in the total and spectral radiation received
from the Sun

140

Impacts on Near-Earth Space

T

he inner heliosphere in which our shielded planet is immersed is an open
range of hostile fire: shot through by both harmful short-wave radiation and
potentially lethal atomic particles from the Sun and the cosmos.
The dosages of solar electromagnetic radiation and of energetic particles tend
to track each other and are highly variable: both from year to year in the course
of the 11-year cycle of solar activity, and from day-to-day and even minuteto-minute in response to solar rotation and impulsive events on the Sun and
disturbances in the solar wind.
The amount of change in the intensity of emitted radiation or energetic
particles is determined primarily by magnetic conditions on the surface and in
the solar atmosphere. Since the temperature of the solar atmosphere increases
with height, so does the energy and variability of particles and radiation that
come from each level. For electromagnetic radiation this means that as we move
upward from the photosphere through the chromosphere and into the corona
the nature of radiation the Sun emits systematically shifts toward shorter, more
energetic and more potentially damaging wavelengths.
The least variable parts of the solar spectrum—which change by no more than
a few tenths of a percent from day-to-day or in the course of the 11-year solar
cycle—are the visible and infrared portions: the light and heat that we receive
from the Sun, which come from the relatively-cool and stable 10,000° F
photosphere.
In contrast, the near-ultraviolet radiation emitted from the higher and more
dynamic 20,000° chromosphere changes by up to several percent in the course
of the solar cycle: a hundred times more variable than radiation in the visible
and infrared. Extreme ultraviolet (EUV) and still-shorter wavelength x-ray
radiation come from even higher, hotter, and more variable levels: from the
transition zone and corona, where temperatures range from about 200,000 to
about 2,000,000° F, and from magnetically-heated material in solar flares.
During the rapid three-to-four year rise in solar activity that follows each
minimum in the 11-year solar cycle the radiation from the Sun in the highlyenergetic EUV increases by 10 to 100 percent or more. In the even more
energetic and potentially lethal x-ray region, the Sun’s output can increase by
factors of more than 1000.
Thus the most variable and impulsive regions in the spectrum of solar radiation
are also the most energetic and potentially damaging. And although few
141
Back to Table of Contents

particles and no short-wave radiation reach the surface of the Earth—not even
at the summit of Mt. Everest—they are present in full strength in near-Earth
space, just above the top of our thin blue atmosphere, where spacecraft fly.
The most energetic solar particles—those with energies per particle of a few
hundred thousand to a billion electron volts or more—also come from explosive
and eruptive events on the Sun. The flux of these, too, though highly variable
in both energy and number, follows the ups and downs of the solar cycle with
many more of the most energetic when the level of solar activity is high.
The flux of cosmic rays—with energies per particle of 108 to 109 or more
electron volts—is also modulated by solar activity, though in the opposite way.
When solar activity is high and conditions in the solar wind more turbulent,
fewer cosmic rays reach the Earth. When solar activity is reduced, more cosmic
rays arrive. Those with energies in the awesome range of 109 to 1020 electron
volts, which are not uncommon, pass right through the heliosphere and our
own upper atmosphere with the greatest of ease, seemingly oblivious to the
presence of the Sun or how active it might be.
Solar Energy Received at the Earth in the form
of Atomic Particles

SOURCE

FRACTION
OF
ALL
ENERGY
RECEIVED
FROM THE
SUN

Coronal
Mass
Ejections

0.0018 %
over periods
of tens of
minutes

High Energy
Protons
From Solar
Flares

0.00015 %
over periods
of minutes
to hours

Up to 8
watts

Occur
sporadically:
energy
deposited
varies by order
of magnitude

Solar Wind

.00002 %

1.2 watts

An order of
magnitude

None

.0000006 %

0.03 watts

20-25%
11-yr variation

None

Galactic
Cosmic Rays

ENERGY
INCIDENT
PER ACRE AT THE
MAGNETOPAUSE:
WHICH TOTALS
5.5 MILLION
WATTS

RANGE OF
DAY-TO-DAY
AND
11-YEAR
CYCLIC
VARIABILITY

COMPONENT
THAT
REACHES
THE EARTH’S
SURFACE

Up to 100
watts

Occur
sporadically:
energy
deposited
varies by order
of magnitude

None

Secondary
particles of lower
energy only

This 11-year heliospheric modulation of cosmic rays, combined with the
occurrence of explosive solar flares and CMEs that march to the same drummer,
continually alter the character and level of risk in near-Earth space.
142

Magnetic Storms

A

major impact of the never-ending flow of solar wind plasma is a reshaping
and extension of the lines of force of the Earth’s extended magnetic field, which,
were the wind turned off, would revert to a simpler and more symmetric form.
The solar wind shapes the magnetosphere on its Sun-facing side by flattening
the magnetopause and pushing it much closer to the planet it protects.
On the nightside, the transfer of momentum from the solar wind extends
the magnetosphere into a long tail that extends more than 20 times its
undisturbed length.
These changes are more than superficial, for they can weaken the magnetosphere’s
defenses by making it easier for solar particles to intrude.
The principal driver of major disturbances in the magnetic field of the
Earth—called magnetic storms—is the extended magnetic field of the Sun,
also called the interplanetary magnetic field or IMF. Magnetic reconnection
is also involved, which directly links the considerable kinetic energy of a fast
or CME-accelerated solar wind stream to the magnetosphere and ionosphere.
The overpowering pull of the solar wind also sets up patterns of large-scale
circulation in the magnetospheric and ionospheric plasma which in turn
provide the energy for geomagnetic storms.
The principal impacts on the Earth of magnetic storms are induced electric
currents that run all the way from the magnetosphere to the Earth’s surface,
and even beneath the ground and on the ocean floor.
				
Magnetic storms are often initiated by the arrival of a plasma cloud that has
been accelerated by a fast-moving CME, or by high-speed streams in the solar
wind. To initiate a storm either of these must bring with it solar magnetic fields
with a significant south-pointing component. Both are often preceded by a
developing shock wave that sets the storm in motion.
The effect at ground level of these sudden disturbances is an abrupt and
sustained jump—sensed around the world—in the strength of the horizontal
component of the Earth’s magnetic field. These appear very clearly in
continuously running records at magnetic observatories, or in erratic behavior
of magnetic compass needles.

143
Back to Table of Contents

These tell-tale warnings—which have been recognized as such since the mid1800s—signal the onset, far above, of a magnetic storm that will trigger a
chain of disruptive physical, chemical and electromagnetic processes in the
upper atmosphere, as well as major impacts on a continually increasing
number of human activities. They can also flip the switch that turns on the
northern and southern lights, in colorful and moving displays of the aurora
borealis and australis.

Horizontal Component of
Surface Magnetic Field

				

Initial
Phase

Main
Phase

Recovery
Phase

SSC

0

Time from Magnetic Storm Commencement

Sequence of transient changes in the relative strength of the horizontal component of the Earth’s surface
magnetic field that together define a typical magnetic storm. In the initial phase, beginning with a
sudden storm commencement (SSC), the field abruptly increases in strength by a distinct rise of a
percent or so. This is followed by a slow and continuous weakening (main phase), lasting from a few
to several hours that depresses the strength of the field by many times this amount, and a subsequent
protracted rise (recovery phase) to its previous value, lasting hours to tens of hours.

Geomagnetic storms unfold in a well-established sequence of three steps, the
first of which, described above, is the warning phase, which is also known as
a sudden storm commencement or initial phase. At this time the lines of force
of the Earth’s field on the Sun-facing side are squeezed inward toward the solid
surface of the planet, producing the observed sudden jump in the strength of
the field. For several hours following this abrupt initiation, the Earth’s magnetic
field remains stronger than normal.
				
During the second and so-called main phase of the storm, lasting hours to a
day, the southward magnetic field in the cloud of solar particles makes contact
with the Earth’s oppositely-directed northward-pointing magnetic field. The
144

two fields join in a process known as magnetic merging or reconnection and
for a time the Earth becomes magnetically connected to an active region on the
Sun, 93 million miles away.
The process creates open magnetic field lines rooted at either of the two magnetic
poles of the Earth, some of which are then swept along the boundary of the
magnetotail. With increasing distance from the Earth the magnetotail narrows,
squeezing field lines of one magnetic polarity, rooted in the north magnetic
pole, closer to those of the opposite polarity, attached to the south magnetic
pole. At several fixed places, known as neutral lines, they are squeezed close
enough to come in contact and join together, creating a long, closed magnetic
loop with its two feet rooted back at the Earth in the two magnetic poles.
Streaming solar wind plasma that comes upon a neutral line in the magnetotail
can pass through the magnetopause and be captured and accelerated in the
magnetosphere, following one or other leg of the newly-formed closed magnetic
loop back toward the Earth into a plasma reservoir, called the plasma sheet,
in the magnetotail. There it mixes in with ions and electrons that have been
carried up from the ionosphere.
				
Magnetic storms distend and disrupt the magnetotail, strengthening electric
fields in the magnetosphere and ionosphere and accelerating particles in the
magnetotail. Electric currents can at these times be shunted down into the
northern and southern polar regions, where current-carrying particles collide
with atmospheric atoms and molecules to produce displays of the aurora.
The systematic motions of positively-charged ions also intensifies an internal
current in the magnetosphere known as the ring current that encircles the
planet in a closed loop, confined to the plane of the magnetic equator, about
26,000 miles above the surface of the Earth.
At this altitude the ring current runs its circular course a few thousand miles
beyond the farthest edge of the outer radiation belt, and about 8000 miles
beyond the geosynchronous orbits where many modern spacecraft fly. One
of its impacts on the magnetosphere is to suppress the strength of the Earth’s
magnetic field which, as we have noted, drops during the main phase of the
storm to levels far below preceding conditions. The formation of a strong ring
current is another defining feature of magnetic storms.
The powerful electric currents carrying more than a million amperes (!) in
the high-latitude auroral region and the equatorial magnetosphere persist from
145
Back to Table of Contents

a few hours to as much as a day, affecting not only the magnetosphere but
the thermosphere and ionosphere as well. In the magnetosphere, the radiation
environment for spacecraft is made more hazardous. In terms of societal effects,
the changes invoked by magnetic storms perturb broad segments of modern
activities. Included are civil and defense communications; commerce and
industry; the operation and control of manned and unmanned spacecraft; the
utility of geographic positioning systems and other aids to navigation, electric
power systems, undersea cables and the operation of satellite telephones.
				
In the final, recovery phase of the storm, which lasts several days, the strength
of the Earth’s field—and with it, affected parts of technologically-aided life on
the planet—gradually return to normal.
The Three Stages of a Geomagnetic Storm
STORM PHASE

DURATION

Initial phase
(sudden
commencement)

Several hours

Compression of the magnetosphere; abrupt onset
and sustained high field strength

Hours to a day

Gradual drop in magnetic field strength at low
latitudes; displays of aurorae at high latitudes;
systematic motion of charged particles within
the magnetosphere; creation of an electrical ring
current around the Earth; ionospheric currents
at mid and high latitudes; effects on modern
technology and society

Main phase

Recovery phase

Several days

CHARACTERISTICS

Slow return to normal field strength

The Aurora

T

he aurora borealis, and its counterpart in the Southern Hemisphere, the aurora
australis, are celestial displays of glowing light that illuminate a considerable
portion of the night sky: sometimes as rays but as often in the form of dancing
ribbons that look like swaying curtains of glowing color. They typically persist
for several hours if not all night and can appear in pure shades of green, red,
blue, or yellow, or when mixed together, white. Though wispy and ethereal,
aurorae can be easily seen with the naked eye with some displays a thousand
times more luminous than the Milky Way, and as bright as the full Moon.
				
It can be no surprise that auroral displays were so often cited in legend, lore
and myth. Nothing else that happens in the dark night sky is as colorful and
146

spectacular, as large and so much in motion, as potentially mysterious or quite
as awe inspiring. In northern parts of Iceland, Norway, Sweden, Denmark
and Finland—where they appear out of nowhere almost every night—aurorae
were seen, for millennia, as an undeniable demonstration of the close presence
and power of supernatural forces. Moreover, their mystical origin seemed
substantiated by the perception of accompanying sound: a soft and eerie
crackling or rustling noise that many today still claim to hear when aurorae
flutter like wind-blown curtains across the darkened sky.
In parts of Europe, Eurasia and the New World where they were more rarely seen,
the appearance of an aurora was long perceived—as were comets and eclipses of
the Sun or Moon—as a portent of awful things to come: or depending on the
inclination of the observer, as a divine blessing of a just-completed happening,
such as a birth or coronation or a battle fought and won.

A “coronal aurora,” in which the locations of the light-emitting atoms of air define the general direction
in space from which the incoming particles responsible for the induced emission appear to have come,
making it look as though the aurora itself streams downward toward the Earth from a point-source in
the sky.

As told a few years ago by the beloved historian Shelby Foote, such was the
perception of many Confederate soldiers when on the cold dark night of
December 13, 1862 they looked up to see what seemed to be a heavenly
endorsement—proclaimed in shimmering banners of multi-colored light—of
their bloody, hard-fought victory that day in the Battle of Fredericksburg,
Virginia. For many of them, born and raised in the deep South, this was very
likely the first aurora they had ever seen, and for some the last, as well.
147
Back to Table of Contents

				
The number of aurorae you might expect to see in a year, or a lifetime, depends
first of all on where you are. Those who live within or close to the Arctic
Circle—in northern Alaska, Canada’s Northwest Territories, Greenland,
Iceland, or in the northern parts of Norway, Sweden, Finland and Russia can
watch ever-changing displays of the northern lights on almost every clear night.
They occur less and less often the farther south one goes from there, such that
within much of the continental United States the appearance of a bright aurora
is a relatively rare phenomenon. And particularly so in the electrically-lit skies
of the modern world.
In non-polar regions of the globe the number of aurorae that are there to be
seen depends as well on the phase of the 11-year solar cycle: for it is CMEs
and high-speed solar wind streams that initiate the chain of events, including
magnetic storms, that turn most bright aurorae on and off. Nights on which
bright aurorae were seen have been recorded in dynastic histories in China and
Korea and in European diaries, personal and professional, since long before
the advent of the telescope in 1609 and the discovery of the sunspot cycle in
1843. In succeeding years, reports of bright aurorae have tracked the 11-year
solar cycle so well that the more ancient auroral accounts are now used to help
extend what is known of the behavior of the Sun through the last 2000 years.
When averaged over the sunspot cycle, and in the absence of clouds, bright
outdoor lights or a full Moon, about 100 auroral displays can be seen during
an average year in Fairbanks, Alaska; 10 in Minneapolis; 5 in Chicago; 1 in
Atlanta; and 1 per decade in Miami.
As the magnetic poles wander, as they always have, these zones of auroral
occurrence will follow along, mile for mile. At the present time, the north
magnetic pole lies some 800 miles south of the Earth’s North rotational pole.
Were it to continue its southward drift, the number of auroral displays seen
in the sampled cities cited above would of course increase. Were it to reverse
direction and drift north as far as the rotational pole, Chicago would see, on
average, but one auroral display per year, Atlanta one per decade, and Miami
perhaps one in a lifetime.
				
Auroral displays, which are also seen over the poles of Jupiter and certain other
planets, are triggered by the arrival of streams of high-speed plasma from the
Sun carrying southward magnetic fields. Auroral substorms, which are linked
to the brightest and most dynamic aurorae, can occur during magnetic storms
or quite on their own.
148

Images of the aurora borealis and australis, made from the POLAR spacecraft in a far-Earth orbit that
crosses the poles of the Earth, offering distant views of all aspects of the entire spherical Earth.
Upper: the Northern Lights in full display, showing the complete auroral oval, here maximizing in
brightness over northern North America, with portions of Greenland and northernmost Canada in sight
within a more northern interior polar region where far fewer aurora occur.
Lower: the simultaneous display of the northern and southern lights, each centered on one of the two
magnetic poles. Representations of the continents in these views of the night-side Earth are added artifacts.

149
Back to Table of Contents

Auroral substorms require an unstable stretched magnetotail with strong crosstail currents. Magnetic storms provide these conditions in spades and drive a
complicated array of auroral activity. But much weaker and shorter duration
southward fields from the Sun can trigger auroral substorms without the need
for magnetic storm conditions to develop. In either case, a portion of the current
across the magnetotail is suddenly shunted through the auroral ionosphere.
In the course of these sudden events some of the stored electrons are released
from the magnetosphere’s mighty grasp and propelled downward at high
velocities into the thermosphere, ionosphere, and upper mesosphere. There, in
the thin air at heights of 50 to 200 miles above the surface of they Earth they
collide with neutral atoms and molecules of nitrogen and oxygen.
These collisions release photons of light, in the pure colors that are emitted
from individual atoms that have been energized in the encounter. The brightest
and most common colors in auroral displays are green and red, both of which
come from oxygen atoms. Blue, the next brightest, is produced by excited
molecules of nitrogen.
				
And the mysterious whispering sounds, that much like UFOs, have long
eluded proof of presence? The great distance (in most cases more than 100
miles) which separates the listener from the source, and the long delay (of up
to ten minutes) that separates the initial arrival of light from the later arrival
of sound makes any physical explanation highly improbable. The most likely
answer, offered by the American physicist Elias Loomis in 1866, is that the
perceived auroral sounds originate not up in the sky but here on the ground,
between our own two ears.
We often hear what we expect to hear, and past experience—while witnessing
fireworks displays or explosions, great or small—conditions our mind to expect
that sound will accompany bright flashes of light: much as people nearly 2000
years ago, according to the Roman historian Tacitus, expected to hear a hissing
sound while watching the setting Sun sink slowly into the ocean, just over the
horizon, ten or twenty miles away; and often claimed they did.
				
Regular observations of aurorae from the vantage point of space allow a global
view, seen from afar, of where they occur, confirming and extending what had
been learned from the ground regarding the extent and characteristic patterns
and differences of auroral displays.

150

Most aurorae in the Northern Hemisphere occur within an almost circular
belt of latitude, 200 to 800 miles in width, known as the auroral oval, that is
approximately centered on the north magnetic pole. A similar auroral oval,
centered on the south magnetic pole defines the zone in which most aurorae
occur in the Southern Hemisphere. The size of the auroral ovals is not fixed
but elastic, their dimensions varying in response to the level of magnetospheric
disturbances on any given day or year.
The north magnetic pole, as noted earlier, is now almost 800 miles south of the
geographic pole and about 300 miles west of Greenland. At times of reduced
solar activity, as at minima of the 11-year solar cycle, the northern auroral
oval—which is centered roughly on that magnetic pole—can shrink in size
until it is less than 1800 miles across: about the distance between Chicago and
San Francisco. At these quiet times all of Alaska, most of Canada’s Northwest
Territories and all but the northern tip of Hudson Bay find themselves, like
Denver or Havana, outside the shrunken auroral oval.
When magnetospheric activity increases, the northern auroral oval expands
to a much larger size, often extending as far south as Seattle, Milwaukee, and
Montreal, and—as was the case in the winter of 1862 (at the peak of the solar
cycle that began at the minimum of 1856 and lasted through 1867)—on down
to Fredericksburg, Virginia, where a war was being fought. During unusually
energetic solar eruptions that trigger major magnetic storms the northern oval
can stretch as far south as Mexico City and Panama.
				
Another class of auroral activity occurs in association with the high-speed solar
wind that blows outward from coronal holes. The wind from coronal holes is
characterized by rapid variations in the imbedded magnetic field direction,
with fields turning rapidly southward then northward then southward again
over and over throughout the ten days it takes for a typical high-speed stream
to reach the Earth. These short intervals of relatively weak southward magnetic
field are sufficient to trigger substorm after substorm, lighting up the auroral
oval repeatedly for a week or more. Strong high-speed streams reach a maximum
in the declining phase of the solar activity cycle. Because of this, more energy
pours into the auroral oval during years near solar minimum than near solar
maximum when CMEs more seriously—but much less frequently—disturb
the auroral oval.
The bright aurorae produced when the most energetic solar disturbances strike
the magnetosphere occur almost entirely within the narrow band of the auroral
oval. Seen from afar—as from the vantage point of space—the auroral oval
151
Back to Table of Contents

appears as an expandable belt of brightness that slides up and down in latitude
from day to day and year to year as magnetospheric activity wanes and waxes.
Nor is the band equally wide all around the globe, for it is three or four times
wider on the night side of the Earth than on the sunlit, day side where unseen
aurorae also continually occur.
These weaker, daytime aurorae—most of which are caused by the precipitation
of trapped particles—cannot be seen from the ground, against the glare of the
daytime sky. But they are always there, and always have been: like the many
flowers, in the words of Thomas Gray, that are born to blush unseen, and waste
their sweetness on the desert air.
Beginning in 1982, when the first global images of the aurora were made from
space, the blooms of daytime aurorae were at last brought into view.

A nighttime view from the Space Shuttle Discovery while flying over the southern hemisphere. Visible,
at the right, a reddish haze above white spikes of light at the curved southern horizon is a display of the
aurora Australis, or southern lights: the counterpart of the northern lights seen near the opposite pole
of the Earth. Both are features of the low thermosphere at heights of about 50 to 80 miles above the
surface of the Earth, well below the Space Shuttle’s altitude of about 200 miles. More brightly glowing
at the left are ionized exhaust gases from the Shuttle’s engines, and their light reflected off the spacecraft’s
vertical stabilizer.

Displays of another weaker class of aurorae—produced when high-speed solar
wind electrons work their way into the magnetosphere through openings in the
magnetotail—are an almost nightly phenomenon in polar and sub-polar
regions. These polar cap aurorae occur poleward of the bounded region of the
auroral oval, in the space that separates it from the magnetic pole, and are seen
throughout the solar cycle.

152

TYPES OF AURORAL DISPLAYS
TYPE

INTENSITY

WHERE SEEN

Brightest and most
dynamic

Within the auroral oval

Daytime aurorae

Weak

At lowest latitudes in the auroral oval

Polar cap aurorae

Weak

Polar cap regions

Active aurorae associated with
geomagnetic substorms

Impacts on the Upper Atmosphere

Atoms and molecules of oxygen and nitrogen in the upper atmosphere—at
altitudes from about fifty to several hundred miles above the surface—absorb
almost all of the short wavelength, extreme ultraviolet and x-ray radiation that
the Sun delivers to the Earth. In this transfer of energy, the Sun heats the air
in the high atmosphere by a thousand degrees or more to create and sustain
the thermosphere, 200 to 500 miles above the surface, while stripping bound
electrons from neutral atoms and molecules to create the ionized layers within
it which are called the ionosphere.
Since they are created and sustained by short-wave solar radiation, both the
thermosphere and ionosphere are directly and instantly affected by any variation
in the radiative energy that the Sun emits in this highly-variable region of the
solar spectrum. Solar radiation in the extreme-ultraviolet varies in the course
of the solar cycle or in response to solar eruptions by 10 to 20 percent, and in
the x-ray region by orders of magnitude.
As a result, the thermosphere and ionosphere take the hardest hammering from
changing solar radiation of any region in the atmosphere. They are also far and
away the most disrupted and variable, including during the daylit hours when
they must respond to the Sun’s daily movement across the sky.
Changes in the amount of solar short-wave radiation provoke rapid responses
in the temperature of the thermosphere. One of the largest perturbations is due
to the daily rising and setting of the Sun, which in a matter of minutes drive
the thermospheric temperature up or down through a range of from several
hundred to several thousand degrees Fahrenheit. The pace of this diurnal
switching—as different parts of the thermosphere are carried by the Earth’s
rotation into and then out of the sunlight—is not to be compared to the
gradual changes in temperature that we sense at dawn or dusk on the surface
of the Earth. In the thin air of the thermosphere the swings in temperature are
far wider and are accomplished much faster.
153
Back to Table of Contents

Typical Day and Nighttime Summer Temperatures in
San Antonio and in the Upper Thermosphere
CIRCUMSTANCE

IN SAN ANTONIO, TEXAS

IN THE UPPER
THERMOSPHERE

Nighttime

75° F

600° F

Daytime, quiet Sun

95

900

Daytime, active Sun

95

2100

Daytime, during a solar flare

95

3100

The day-lit half of the thermosphere must also respond, equally fast and
vehemently, to any significant change in the energy that the Sun delivers
in the EUV. The occurrence of a solar flare can raise the temperature of the
thermosphere by another 1000° F or more; as can the evolving background
change in solar activity, from years of minima to times of maxima in the cycle.
Adding extra heat to the already hot thermosphere causes it to swell and expand
upward. For example, the 1500° difference between nighttime and daytime
temperature due to the Earth’s rotation introduces a hemispheric bulge on the
Sun-facing half of the thermosphere: a congenital lopsidedness which has been
a feature of our planet from the time it had an atmosphere.
In addition to this daily oscillation, the vertical extent of the thermosphere has
for billions of years been rising and falling on other scales of time: breathing
out and breathing in—as solar activity waxed and waned—in response to dayto-day and year-to-year changes on a star 93 million miles away.
For the most part, these heat-driven waves at the top of the atmosphere were
until the middle of the last century largely unnoticed or ignored—like the
heaving of the middle ocean before the days of sail. But when man-made
satellites began to circle the Earth, these variations came to be important.
When the thermosphere expands upward, it intrudes into the more tenuous
regions through which many Earth-orbiting spacecraft fly. For the Hubble
Space Telescope, the International Space Station or any of the other spacecraft
orbiting the Earth in the 150 to 400 mile range, any increase in the density of
the medium through which it flies will slow it down. This in turn reduces the
diameter of its orbit and the height at which it flies, and hastens the day when
it will plunge into the deeper atmosphere and return, in pieces, to the surface
of the Earth.

154

Perturbing the Earth’s Electric Field

Solar-driven

changes in the temperature, density and dynamics of the
thermosphere can also perturb the Earth’s electric field: a fundamental property
of the planet which we witness from time to time in the course of thunder and
lightning storms.
Flashes of lightning mark times and places where the negatively-charged surface
of the Earth is momentarily connected, through an electrical discharge, to the
storm-generated, positively-charged upper layers of clouds that float above
it. These spectacular happenings are but the most visible element of a global
electric circuit that couples all of the atmosphere, from top to bottom, to the
Earth beneath it: one of the few direct connections that link the top of the
atmosphere to the biosphere, hundreds of miles below.
Thunderstorms are one of the three mechanisms that generate the electrical
power that establishes and maintains a voltage of about 300,000 volts between
the negatively-charged ground and the positively-charged ionosphere. One of
the others is the dynamo that generates electric currents when the solar wind
interacts with the Earth’s magnetic field.
Winds in the thermosphere power a third electric current generator. These
are driven, like the winds we feel at the surface, by differences from place to
place in the local temperature and density, which in this case are induced by
variations in the intensity of solar EUV radiation. At these lofty heights the
thermospheric material that is carried in the winds is weakly-ionized plasma:
ions and free electrons that act as an electrical conductor and current generator
when they move through the lines of force of the Earth’s magnetic field.
The currents added to the global circuit from any of these sources affect the
difference in voltage between the ionosphere and the Earth’s surface. Charged
atomic particles, whether from the Sun or from more distant cosmic sources,
can bring about a similar effect by reducing the electrical resistance—normally
almost infinite—in the layers of air that separate the ionosphere from the solid
or liquid surface of the planet. Alone, or acting together, these two impacts—
one from the Sun’s EUV radiation, the other from incoming charged
particles—directly affect the global electric circuit, and perhaps the number of
thunderstorms.

155
Back to Table of Contents

Restructuring the Ionosphere

T

he ionosphere, or ionized atmosphere, is the name given to the concentrated
layer of charged particles—electrons and ionized atoms and molecules—
that extends from the top of the mesosphere through the lower part of the
thermosphere: from 40 to about 400 miles above the surface of the Earth, with
a maximum charge density at a height of about 200 miles.
The electrons and ions are created and sustained there through the action of
solar short-wave radiation, solar particles and cosmic rays on neutral atoms and
molecules of nitrogen and oxygen, the most abundant species in the atmosphere.
In the process of these encounters the neutral atoms and molecules are deprived
of some of their bound electrons and become electrified, or ionized.
The outstanding societal effects of the Sun’s creation and control of the
ionosphere are its impacts on electronic communications of all kinds and
at almost all frequencies, including radio, television, satellite telephone,
navigation, data transfer systems, spacecraft control and countless military and
other national security systems.
Disruptions in these and other telecommunications systems are caused by solardriven changes in the concentrations of charged particles at different heights in
the ionosphere, which alter how electromagnetic waves are reflected, absorbed
or allowed to pass through it.
				
The number of electrons and ions in the ionosphere is determined by an
ongoing give and take between their rate of production—governed by the
varying intensity of solar short-wave radiation and incident particles—and the
rate at which the newly-freed electrons and ions once again recombine to form
reconstituted particles of neutral charge.
Thus, as a portion of the ionosphere is carried by the Earth’s rotation into the
darkened half of the planet, the rate at which electrons and new ions are produced
falls rapidly toward zero: as does the number of charged particles within it, such
that by the end of the night the ionosphere’s structure and composition have
changed dramatically. So much so that most of the lower ionosphere—beneath
a height of about 70 miles—will have vanished, leaving only an upper part that
extends high into the thermosphere, called the F-region.

156

Soon after sunrise, incoming sunlight restores the lost lower layers while
increasing the thickness and density of charged particles in the much higher
all-night region by about a factor of ten: in all, a dawn and dusk ritual, high
in the sky, which has been acted out, unseen, since long before dinosaurs first
appeared on the planet.
The reality of day-to-night changes in the structure of the ionosphere is
quite apparent to anyone who when tuning in after dark to AM radio hears
unexpected broadcasts from far away stations with strange sounding names:
words, often in foreign tongues, that have been bounced and rerouted part-way
around the Earth by the high nighttime ionosphere.
Other more disruptive and less predictable changes in the density of the
ionosphere are the direct impacts of solar variability: specifically, changes in the
amount of energy that the Sun releases in the form of EUV and x-ray radiation
and the impacts of charged atomic particles. During a solar flare, for example,
the ultraviolet and x-ray radiation from the Sun increases from 10 to more
than 100%, as it does in the course of the 11-year solar activity cycle, and the
energies of incoming solar particles by as much or more than that.
				
Since the late 1920s, the structure of the ionosphere has been described in
terms of three distinct horizontal layers, distinguished by composition and
vertical extent and labeled, from the lowest upward, the D, E, and F regions.
All three are made up of ions and free electrons, but the expected lifetimes of
any of these short-lived atomic particles vary from layer to layer, due principally
to the ever-decreasing density with height in the neutral atmosphere. In the
F-region, which extends from 100 to 400 miles above our heads, the air is so
thin that ions and free electrons less frequently come in contract with other
particles, and as a result can exist an hour or so before they recombine.
The greater concentration of particles in the E-region (60 to 80 miles high)
shortens the expected lifetimes of ionized particles to a few minutes; and in
the most dense and crowded D-region (40 to 60 miles high) charged atomic
particles remain that way for but a few seconds. It is because of these short
lifetimes that densities of particles in the D-region and a part of the E soon
fall to zero at nightfall.
Two factors work to keep the F-region of the ionosphere from disappearing
altogether in the dark of the night. The first, noted above, is the fact that ions,
once created, survive a while longer in less dense regions of the atmosphere
157
Back to Table of Contents

before recombining: an extended lease on life that lengthens with increasing
height in the ionosphere.
The second is the replenishment of a fraction of the lost ions by the impact
of nighttime cosmic rays on neutral atoms and molecules, supplemented by
enfeebled solar ultraviolet radiation that has been scattered and redirected at
high levels into the darkened half of the ionosphere from the adjoining daylit
half. This weak leakage of light from day to night is not unlike the diffuse
nighttime glow we commonly see, just over the horizon, from the lights of a
neighboring city.
Some ions and free electrons are found in the upper atmosphere both above and
below the portion that we call “ionosphere.” With increasing altitude more and
more of the neutral atoms and molecules become ionized, and the atmosphere
is transformed from wholly neutral to almost completely charged.
The gradual changeover from neutral to ionized begins at an altitude of about
35 miles—not far above the stratopause—and continues all the way to the top:
where the “atmosphere” ends and the exosphere and magnetosphere begin. At
this ill-defined boundary electrons and ions flow both up and down: many of
those carried up into the magnetosphere by the daytime thermal expansion
of the thermosphere are drawn back down again at night as the thermosphere
cools and shrinks.
What distinguishes the ionosphere from other regions of the atmosphere that
also contain electrons and ions is the number of charged particles which are
found there. For although the ratio of ionized to neutral particles is less in
the ionosphere than in the high thermosphere and exosphere, there are many
more of them per cubic inch or cubic mile. It is also in this unique band of
altitudes—between about 40 and 400 miles above the surface—that the
optimum is reached between the intensity of solar short-wave radiation (greater
the higher you go) and the number of neutral particles to be ionized, which
goes the other way.
				
But why D, E, and F? These familiar identifiers of the three layers in the
ionosphere were assigned in the late 1920s, in the course of the first remote soundings
of the region. In the heady days of initial discovery, it was thought prudent to hold
the first three letters of the alphabet in reserve, in case additional, lower layers
might be found. But as it turned out, neither these nor any of the letters that
follow F were ever called into service.
158

THE LAYERED IONOSPHERE
HEIGHT
IN
MILES

CONTENT

TYPICAL
LIFETIMES
OF
PARTICLES

PRINCIPAL
IONS

MAIN SOURCE
OF
IONIZATION

F

100-400

electrons,
ions

1 hour

O+

solar EUV radiation

E

60-100

electrons,
ions

1 minute

NO+, O2+

solar EUV and
x-ray radiation

D

40-60

ions and in
the daytime,
electrons

1 second

NO+, O2+

solar EUV and
x-ray radiation;
solar particles and
cosmic rays

REGION

Disturbing the Biosphere: The Lower
Atmosphere, Oceans, and Land Surface

T

he most energetic and highly variable radiation from the Sun—in the shortwave EUV, x-ray and gamma–ray spectrum—is wholly absorbed in the upper
reaches of the atmosphere and never makes it down into the biosphere, where
all of life is found. Nor do any of the highest energy atomic particles that rain
down on the Earth from the Sun and other cosmic sources.
What does reach the lower atmosphere, oceans, and solid surface of the planet
are less energetic particles, light (visible radiation), heat (the infrared), and a
small portion of the invisible near-ultraviolet: in all, about 60% of the energy
the Sun delivered at the top of the atmosphere.
Some of the 60% is reflected back into space by clouds and land and sea and
ice, but by far the largest part of this—about half of what the Sun delivers—is
utilized in the biosphere. Among these tasks are heating the oceans and the
solid surface, and through these, the lower atmosphere; creating winds and
clouds and providing rain; regulating CO2 and other greenhouse gases through
the Earth’s solar-driven carbon cycle that returns some of these pollutants to the
oceans and ocean sediments, where through plate tectonics and volcanism they
are eventually released; driving the hydrologic cycle that makes the rivers flow;
fueling photosynthesis; establishing and sustaining the ozone layer in the low
stratosphere; coloring the sky; and illuminating much of what we do.
Because the Sun’s outputs of visible, infrared and near-ultraviolet radiation all
vary to some degree in response to solar activity, all of these terrestrial services
are potentially affected by changes on the Sun. In most of them, including all
that involve visible or infrared radiation from the Sun, the immediate impacts
159
Back to Table of Contents

of solar variability are far smaller than the changes induced by internal forcing
in the system. Among these non-solar sources of variability are the day-to-night
changes that result from the Earth’s rotation; the perennial march of the seasons;
recurrent ocean-atmosphere interactions such as El Niño/La Niña; the varying
absorption of clouds, atmospheric aerosols and pollutants; and in the longer
term, the introduction of greenhouse gases of human origin.
Origins of Solar Radiation and Affected Regions
of the Earth’s Atmosphere
SOLAR ORIGIN

AFFECTED PART
OF THE EARTH’S
ATMOSPHERE

WAVELENGTH
RANGE
(IN NANOMETERS
OR MICRONS μ)

Photosphere

Troposphere, stratosphere

400 nm to 10 μ

Upper photosphere
and chromosphere

Stratosphere, mesosphere,
lower thermosphere

120 to 400 nm

EUV

Chromosphere,
transition zone

Thermosphere; E and F
layers of the ionosphere

10 to 120 nm

X-ray

Corona

D and E layers of the
ionosphere

0 to 10 nm

SPECTRAL
RANGE
Visible and
Infrared
UV

Since solar radiation in the visible and infrared portions of the spectrum varies so
little—less than half a percent in the course of a day, a year or the 11-year cycle—any
of these competing weather and climate drivers can easily overwhelm and hide more
subtle changes of solar origin, and particularly on shorter scales of time: minutes or
months and even years.
As a result, it is often only in the longer term—through slower and more
persistent forcing—that the deeper sounds of the Sun emerge through the
noisy background chatter of shorter and more ephemeral perturbations.
More immediate and readily recognized are the impacts on the lower atmosphere
of the near-ultraviolet solar radiation that reaches the lower stratosphere and
upper troposphere. In the region between about ten and thirty miles above the
surface, the absorption of solar ultraviolet radiation by molecular oxygen creates
a small amount of ozone (about 1 part ozone to 10 million parts of air) which,
though variable from place to place and time to time, is sufficient to shield life
on the surface of the Earth from more lethal doses of solar ultraviolet rays.
Atmospheric ozone is also the creator of the sinuous vertical temperature profile
of the Earth’s atmosphere. This it does by absorbing solar short-wave radiation,
slowing the steady drop in temperature with height in the troposphere, and
at the tropopause, turning it completely around so that the temperature of
160

the air increases with height through the next 20 miles of altitude. The result
is the Earth’s warm stratosphere: a feature of our planet that is unique in the
solar system.
Both the thickness of the ozone layer and the temperature structure of the
stratosphere are directly affected by changes in solar activity since they are each
driven by solar radiation in the near-ultraviolet. But what the Sun giveth it also
taketh away, for solar radiation in an adjacent region of the near-ultraviolet
breaks ozone molecules apart.
Also at work is the destruction of ozone by chlorine, almost all of which
finds its way into the stratosphere in the form of industrially-produced
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), and by the catalytic influence of nitrogen oxides—
much of which is produced by agriculture and the burning of fossil fuels.
The well-established solar control of stratospheric ozone offers as well a potential
mechanism that might link solar variability to weather and climate, through
connections that tie meteorological conditions in the stratosphere to those in
the troposphere.
What is undeniable is the role of solar infrared radiation in establishing the
temperature and circulation of the lower atmosphere, the temperature of the
surface and subsurface ocean, and the temperature of the Earth’s surface. Since
the Sun’s infrared radiation varies systematically in step with the solar cycle—
rising slightly with increased activity and falling as it wanes—its influence
should and does show up in records of all of these weather parameters.

161
Back to Table of Contents

SOLAR IMPACTS
INCREASED LEVEL
OF UV AND X-RAY
RADIATION
INCREASED
FLUX OF ATOMIC
PARTICLES
MAGNETIC
STORMS
AURORAL
DISPLAYS
THERMOSPHERIC
TEMPERATURE
INDUCED
ELECTRIC
CURRENTS
IONOSPHERIC
CHANGES
STRATOSPHERIC
OZONE
• AIR
TEMPERATURE
• OCEAN
TEMPERATURE
• LAND
TEMPERATURE

162

CLIMATE

GEOLOGIC SURVEYS AND
EXPLORATION

OPERATION OF OIL
AND GAS PIPELINES

ELECTRIC POWER
TRANSMISSION

GEOGRAPHIC POSITION
FINDING AND NAVIGATION

TELECOMMUNICATIONS
AND NATIONAL SECURITY

OBSERVATIONS OF THE
EARTH FROM SPACE

OPERATION OF SPACECRAFT
ANDSPACE EQUIPMENT

HUMAN SPACE FLIGHT

AIR TRAVEL

HUMAN ACTIVITIES

IMPACTS OF SOLAR VARIABILITY ON THE EARTH AND
NEAR-EARTH SPACE AND THE HUMAN ACTIVITIES
THAT THEY ADVERSELY AFFECT

163
Back to Table of Contents

Some of the ways by which solar eruptions and the geomagnetic storms which they induce affect our lives and livelihood on the
ground, beneath the sea, in the air and in near-Earth space.

EFFECTS ON HUMAN LIFE AND
ENDEAVOR
What Is Affected

I

n what ways are we affected when solar disturbances alter conditions in the
Earth’s near-space environment, in the magnetosphere and ionosphere, the
atmosphere, and the oceans and solid surface of the planet?
Two hundred years ago, when sunspots were all that was known of solar
variability, it was suspected that their coming and going were in some ways
affecting the weather and the number of auroral displays that were seen, athough
neither connection had been verified. By 1950, however, when telegraphy,
transoceanic cables, telephones, wireless radio, radar and more extensive electric
power distribution systems had come upon the scene, the societal impacts of
solar activity had reached far beyond possible ties to the weather into other
areas of societal concern. Foremost among these were disabling effects on
radio and other electronic communications, and disruptions of electric power
distribution systems.
By the late 1950s, and particularly after our entry into space, the list of societal
consequences rapidly increased in number and importance, as they have, almost
exponentially, since then.
Today the heavy commercial and military reliance on spacecraft—particularly
those in more hazardous high-Earth orbits—and the plans for a manned return
to the Moon and for possible human exploration of distant Mars have vastly
increased our vulnerability to the changing moods of the Sun. As has the
switch in the last decade from custom-produced “space-hardened” electronic
components to those that are available commercially, off-the-shelf.
In this section we summarize and then describe some of the specific ways
through which the Sun’s impacts on the Earth affect a broad range of human
activities.

Some Specific Societal Effects
AIRCRAFT TRAVEL
Operational flight control and other aircraft communication outages;
165
Back to Table of Contents

exposure of passengers and crew on high altitude polar flights to mild dosages
of CME-accelerated particles, high-energy particles from solar flares, and
GCRs; and disruption or failure of essential ground-to-air and air-to-ground
communications
HUMAN SPACE FLIGHT
Increased exposure of astronauts, both within a spacecraft or, with greater risk,
while outside it, to high energy particles from solar flares and CMEs. During
EVAs or when on the Sun-lit surface of the Moon or Mars, astronauts are also
highly vulnerable to enhanced x-ray emission from the Sun
OPERATION OF SPACECRAFT AND SPACE EQUIPMENT
Electrical charging of the surface of the spacecraft resulting in degradation
of the metallic surface; induced charging of cables and surfaces within the
spacecraft, leading to deleterious impacts on the operation of computer
memory and processors and to damage or failure of semiconductor devices
in electronic components and other instruments; orbital perturbations and
accelerated orbital decay due to the solar-driven expansion of the thermosphere;
degradation of the surfaces of solar cells; disruption of spacecraft attitudecontrol; and interference with low-altitude satellite tracking
OBSERVATIONS OF THE EARTH FROM SPACE
Interruption and degradation of data used in preparing daily meteorological
forecasts, in tracking and monitoring hurricanes and other storms, in forecasting
expected crop yields, and for surveillance and other national security purposes
COMMUNICATIONS AND NATIONAL SECURITY
Ionospheric disturbance of radio transmissions of all kinds and in almost all
radio-frequency bands, affecting nearly every form of electronic communication,
including satellite telephones, network television, operation of communications
satellites, transmissions to and from orbiting spacecraft, and essential military
communications and radar systems. Other disturbances arise from induced
electrical currents in long under-sea telecommunication cables, long-haul
telecommunication lines, and certain fiber-optics systems
GEOGRAPHIC POSITION FINDING AND NAVIGATION
Errors and reduced accuracy in GPS systems affecting navigation and position
finding at sea, in the air, and on the surface of the Earth; malfunction of other
navigational aids; and the introduction of magnetic compass errors
ELECTRIC POWER TRANSMISSION
Power black-outs, brown-outs and disruption of electric power grids, triggered
by solar-induced currents in power lines and overheating and eventual failure of
166

power-line transformers; curtailing the cost-saving ability of electric power grids
to move cheaper electricity from available sources to users at more costly sites
OPERATION OF OIL AND GAS PIPELINES
Solar-induced electric currents in long pipelines at high latitudes, leading to
corrosion and the ultimate failure of metal and welded joints
GEOLOGICAL SURVEYING AND PROSPECTING
errors and reduced accuracy in geological survey work, including prospecting
for minerals and oil, due to solar-driven perturbations and the impacts of
magnetic storms on the Earth’s surface magnetic field; operational failures
in drilling operations that rely on the Earth’s magnetic field for directional
reference
REGIONAL AND GLOBAL CLIMATE
Increase in the mean surface temperature of the Earth and the surface and
subsurface temperature of the oceans, affecting atmospheric circulation and
precipitation; exacerbation or amelioration of other agents of climatic change,
including El Niños and human-induced greenhouse warming

Exposure of Aircraft Passengers and Crews

S

olar activity can affect the safety of high altitude jet aircraft flight in
two different ways. The first and most often encountered is interference in
essential ground-to-air and air-to-ground communications. The second is the
exposure of aircraft passengers and crews to potentially-harmful high-energy
atomic particles.
Passengers and crews in high-flying aircraft are fully shielded from
potentially-harmful solar ultraviolet and x-ray radiation by the metallic skin
of the aircraft, just as astronauts are shaded from more intense sunlight at
spacecraft altitudes.
This is not the case, however, for energetic particles from solar flares, CMEs
and cosmic sources that have made their way into the upper troposphere and
lower stratosphere, where aircraft fly. For these fast-moving and extremely
energetic particles, the metallic skin and frame of an aircraft present almost
no obstacle at all. Sufficiently energetic cosmic rays and solar particles will
also pass through the aircraft interior as well as clothing and human skin like
high-speed bullets through a paper target, to continue on at high velocity into
human tissue and cells.

167
Back to Table of Contents

There they can ionize some of the atoms of which living cells are made, and—
in sufficient dosage—alter the structure of impacted cells, and through these
changes introduce mutations in the ensuing generations that these cells produce.
Sufficient exposure to this kind of so-called ionizing radiation, (whether at one
time or accumulated in the course of many months or years) can produce
different forms of radiation sickness and possibly lead to cancer.
The degree to which crews or passengers are affected on any jet flight depends
on the flight trajectory, including altitude and the regions of the Earth over
which it flies. Air travel at conventional jet aircraft altitudes and within
middle or low latitudes—like most flights within the lower 48 states—are
but little affected.
				
More at risk are flights that spend a significant amount of time over polar and
sub-polar regions, where energetic solar particles more easily stream down into
the atmosphere. Most of these incoming particles lose much of their original
energy high in the atmosphere, through collisions with atoms and molecules
of air, but some of the second generation particles that are produced in these
collisions continue downward into the altitudes where jet aircraft fly.
The number of downward streaming secondary cosmic rays reaches a maximum
at an altitude of about twelve miles or 66,000 ft: but a few miles above the
highest altitude at which today’s jet aircraft fly. Below that, depleted by thicker
air and more frequent collisions among particles, the number begins to fall.
Thus, in the range of altitudes at which commercial, business, and military
jet aircraft fly—between about 30,000 and 50,000 ft—the expected dose of
secondary cosmic particles increases markedly with altitude. A jet aircraft
climbing from 30,000 to 40,000 ft (the range of altitudes of most commercial
airliners) triples its expected exposure to cosmic rays. Climbing above 40,000
to the rarified altitudes at which the next generation of commercial airliners
will fly—between 50,000 and 60,000 ft—will increase the dosage by another
factor of three or four.
A map of the world showing the expected dosage of energetic particles at a given
jet aircraft altitude would portray an extensive zone of significant risk centered
on each of the two magnetic poles of the Earth. Due to the considerable offset of
the north magnetic pole (today about 1000 miles south and west of the North
rotational pole) this zone of greatest exposure reaches farther down in latitude
in western North America than elsewhere in the Northern Hemisphere.

168

60
Altitude in Thousands of Feet

FUTURE AIR TRANSPORT
50
BUSINESS JETS • AIRLINERS
40
COMMERCIAL AIRLINES
30
20
10
0

0

2

4
8
6
Dose Rate of Galactic Cosmic Radiation

The dose of damaging radiation from galactic cosmic rays expected at different aircraft altitudes, from
the surface of the Earth to 60,000 ft., showing the altitude range at which different types of aircraft now
operate. A prevailing trend in future aircraft planning and design is to operate at altitudes in the now
little-used band between 50,000 and 60,000 ft. in order to increase the range of ever larger aircraft and to
utilize less congested air space. Any change in this direction will sharply increase the exposure of aircraft
passengers and crews to high energy galactic particles. The curve shown here applies to low and middle
latitudes; the dosage will increase as a function of higher geographic latitude, with highest dosages in
polar and sub-polar regions.

This southward bulge of the more hazardous zone affects all who travel at high
altitudes over Canada and as far south as the Great Lakes and the northern
tier of states in our own country. Most exposed are passengers and crews
on long-distance, intercontinental flights—such as those from New York to
Tokyo, or Seattle to London or Frankfurt—that follow great circle routes that
carry them over sub-polar regions in northern Canada or Greenland. In the
course of five of these polar crossings a passenger or crew-member will have
typically absorbed an amount of high energy particle radiation that exceeds the
maximum recommended yearly dosage.
The routes followed by the Concorde, which took it back and forth across the
Atlantic at middle rather than high latitudes, mitigated some of the added risk
that comes with flying at an altitude of about 58,000 ft (compared to 30 to
50,000 feet for conventional commercial airliners.) The Concorde was also
helped in this regard by its supersonic speed which—like running instead of
walking through the rain—considerably shortened the exposure time.
				
169
Back to Table of Contents

The radiation dosage encountered in most commercial jet-aircraft flights is no
more than what one expects from a medical x-ray; although in a flight that
happens to cross polar and sub-polar latitudes at the time when high-energy
solar protons arrive, the dosage would considerably exceed that amount. In any
case, in most single encounters of this kind, immediate risks to the health of
passengers and crew are not severe.
These concerns increase with repetition, as in the case of passengers or crews
who regularly or frequently fly on intercontinental flights that take them across
these more exposed polar regions. Most at risk are pregnant passengers or crew
members, aircraft crews in general, and the half million frequent fliers who log
more than 75,000 miles—three times around the Earth at the equator—year
after year.
The intensity of particle radiation at jet aircraft altitudes can be ten to fifteen
times higher than normal after the eruption of major flares and CMEs, with
highest dosages in those cases when streams of energetic particles from a major
solar eruption happen to reach the aircraft while it is passing over polar and
sub-polar regions. The most energetic of these particles are protons from major
solar flares with single-particle energies in the range of a million to a billion
electron volts. The more energetic of these can reach an aircraft in less than
twenty minutes after the flare was first sighted, limiting the time available for
aircraft to be diverted to reduce the impact of these particle incursions on airto-ground and ground-to-air communications.
AIRCRAFT OPERATIONAL ALTITUDES IN RELATION TO
ATMOSPHERIC FEATURES
ATMOSPHERIC FEATURE
TYPE OF AIRCRAFT
Average height of tropopause
Commercial airliners
Business jets
Tropopause over equatorial latitudes
Supersonic aircraft (Concorde)
Planned future air transport

DISTANCE
ABOVE THE
EARTH’S
SURFACE IN
MILES

IN
THOUSANDS
OF FEET

6

32

6-8

32-42

8 - 10

42-53

9 - 10

48-53

11

58

10 - 12

53-63

Maximum dose of secondary cosmic rays

12.5

66

Deepest penetration of primary GCRs

25

132

The possible effects on health of accumulated exposure are of sufficient concern
that airlines and military flights routinely alter flight paths and altitudes to
170

minimize the effects of particle radiation on communications; maintain records
of each pilot’s and crew member’s career exposure; and rotate flight crews so
as to limit their cumulative total. For these reasons, the European Union
has adopted laws that mandate a certain amount of radiation monitoring on
commercial airline flights.

Risks to Manned Space Flight

T

hree perils await space travelers who venture beyond the atmospheric and
magnetospheric shields that for billions of years have allowed life to evolve on
a planet immersed in a wholly hostile environment.
The first is the obvious drop in air pressure as one rises higher and higher above
the surface of the Earth, and with it, a rapidly dwindling supply of oxygen
to breathe. The second is more direct exposure to the full intensity of solar
electromagnetic radiation, from the shortest to the longest wavelengths but
particularly the highly energetic and penetrating extreme-ultraviolet and x-ray
radiation from the Sun, which we never feel on the surface of the Earth. The
third—most dangerous to life and health and hardest to avoid—is a direct
exposure to streams of highly energetic atomic particles that arrive from solar
disturbances and cosmic sources.

The Ocean of Air

Like fish in water, we can survive without artificial aid only at the bottom

of an oxygen-rich ocean of air. Our ability to ascend safely above this abyssal
depth—to the top of the atmosphere or even part way there—will always
require that we bring with us our own pressurized atmosphere.
In the range of altitudes at which jet aircraft fly—seven or eight miles above
the surface—air pressure and available oxygen are depleted by factors of four
to six compared to conditions at the level of the seas. There—as in spacecraft
operating at heights where ambient pressure and available oxygen have fallen
by factors of more than a million—conditions essential for life are met by
pressurizing and continually replenishing the air within the aircraft cabin.
On those occasions when astronauts venture outside their hermetically-sealed
spacecraft—as during EVAs or on the surface of the Moon or Mars—the
necessary environment is reproduced by pressurizing their air-tight space suits,
helmets and gloves to atmospheric levels, and by carrying with them a portable
oxygen supply.

171
Back to Table of Contents

Enhanced Ultraviolet and X-Ray Radiation

The threat from solar ultraviolet and x-ray radiation—which increase in

intensity the higher we go—is more easily kept at bay.

Near-, intermediate- and extreme-ultraviolet radiation is able to penetrate the
skin, damaging both the epidermis and the living tissue beneath it. Ultraviolet
radiation is also particularly damaging to the eyes, and to the immune system.
The aluminum body of an aircraft or spacecraft is more than adequate to block
the full spectral range of the ultraviolet, as is the material of which windows in
either of these are made. When outside the spacecraft, an astronaut’s space suit,
helmet and highly-reflective visor provide an equivalent level of protection
against direct solar ultraviolet radiation.

Solar X-Rays

Solar x-rays, which are considerably more energetic than those employed
in medicine, dentistry and airport security systems, are more hazardous than
ultraviolet radiation and not as easily blocked.

As has been known and put to use for more than 100 years, clothing and
flesh are transparent to x-rays. This is also true of much denser materials when
directly exposed to the more energetic x-rays that come from the Sun. It is
also known that a sufficiently long or cumulative exposure to x-rays—and
particularly the more energetic—can damage and alter the further division of
human cells, in the same way that energetic particles do: by ionizing some of
the atoms of which they are made.
When within the metal shell of a spacecraft, astronauts are adequately shielded
from both far-ultraviolet and x-ray radiation. The risk comes during extravehicular activity or when an astronaut in a space suit permeable to x-rays
finds herself or himself on the sunlit surface of the Moon or Mars at a time
when a major solar flare erupts. Unless cover is immediately found, the time of
direct exposure to x-rays could last up to an hour or more: as compared to the
fraction of a second employed in medical and dental x-rays. Moreover, the area
potentially exposed is more extensive: not one’s jaw or lungs or forearm, but
everything there is from head to toe.

A Sun Intensely Bright

O

ne should never look directly at the face of the Sun, unless it is severely
dimmed in some way or seen through a very dark and dense optical filter.
172

When seen from above most or all of the ocean of air, the potential risks are
even greater.
In space, where there is no atmospheric absorption or scattering of sunlight,
the disk of the Sun is definitely brighter, and much more so at the violet end
of the visible spectrum. It was with this in mind that the helmets worn during
EVAs—and by Apollo astronauts on the Moon—are equipped with highlyreflective, gold-mirrored visors.
There is as well the potential of a kind of snow-blindness, if anyone within a
spacecraft should catch an inadvertent glimpse at the first rays of the Sun at
sunrise: an event that is repeated about every ninety minutes, or sixteen times
each day for those in lower orbits about the Earth. And each time—as on the
road to Mandalay—the dawn comes up like thunder.
In truth—as with many other familiar things—there is no dawn in space.
Instead, the first sliver of the rising Sun appears abruptly and without warning,
for in the absence of an atmosphere there is no gradual bluing of the coal-black
sky or any colored glow on the horizon to herald its coming, and to condition
the dark-adapted eye. Moreover, when it appears, the Sun also climbs above
the horizon far faster—as in a speeded-up movie—since the apparent motion
of the Sun through the sky is, when in orbit about the Earth, driven not by
the 24-hour rotation of the planet but the 1½ hour orbit of the spacecraft
around it.
For an astronaut who—while looking out, perhaps, at the black starlit sky—
chances to see the first bright edge of the fast-rising Sun it would seem like the
shock of a flash-bulb in a totally darkened room, though in this case as bright
as a welder’s torch.

Solar Energetic Particles and Cosmic Rays

Because of their mass and extremely high speeds, atomic particles carry very

high energies and are therefore far more lethal than the damaging ultraviolet
or x-ray electromagnetic radiation that comes from the Sun. They are also
much harder to protect against, for not only space suits and helmets but
the materials from which spacecraft are made present few obstacles to these
speeding bullets.
Astronauts have even “seen” some of these invasive high energy particles while
in space. Beginning with the first Project Mercury flights, astronauts in orbit
about the Earth have reported seeing flashes of bright light, which are visible
173
Back to Table of Contents

whether their eyes were open or closed. These were soon identified as the
tracks of cosmic rays or solar energetic protons that produced what is known
as Cêrenkov light on their way through the astronaut’s head: more specifically,
through the viscous medium that fills the eyeball. Cêrenkov radiation, which
has been known since 1939, is a form of light created by charged atomic
particles when they pass through a transparent substance at a speed greater
than the velocity of light in that medium.
Particles from solar flares or cosmic sources with energies from ten to several
hundred million electron volts (MeV) can easily penetrate the thin metal skin
and frame of a spacecraft: which, as in airplanes, is designed with minimum
weight in mind. A 100 MeV proton traveling at velocities close to that of light
itself can pass through a good 1½ inches of aluminum—about three times
the thickness of the steel hull of the Titanic—before it is stopped. Lighter
and hence weaker 3 MeV electrons—of the sort that swarm in great numbers
within the Earth’s radiation belts—can make it through a sheet of aluminum
a quarter-inch thick. And the most energetic particles—galactic cosmic rays
(GCRs) with energies as great as a billion or more electron volts (GeV), are for
most situations in space essentially unstoppable.
Thus the health hazard of greatest concern in manned spaceflight, as in highaltitude jet aircraft travel, is exposure to high-energy solar atomic particles and
galactic cosmic rays.
The expected dosage in a high altitude aircraft—even over the poles or during
major solar flares—is much reduced, since by the time these speeding particles
(or more correctly, their descendants) reach the altitudes at which conventional
aircraft fly, they have lost much of their original prodigious energy through
encounters with atoms and molecules of air on their way down.
This is not the case for spacecraft. What is more, the expected dosage
increases considerably with travel in higher orbits that take them into or near
the Earth’s radiation belts: and more so beyond the protective arms of the
magnetosphere.
Another hazardous zone for spacecraft that travel in Earth orbits within or
below the magnetosphere is the South Atlantic Anomaly, or SAA: a portion of
the Earth’s magnetic field located over southern South America and the South
Atlantic Ocean where the field strength is considerably reduced. In this danger
zone—which might seem reminiscent of the Bermuda Triangle were it not in
this case real—energetic particles in the Earth’s inner radiation belt are able
to penetrate more deeply into the thermosphere, to altitudes where so many
spacecraft in near-Earth orbits fly.
174

Flight Paths of Aircraft and Spacecraft in order
of Increasing Exposure to High-Energy
Particles and Radiation
FLIGHT PATH
AND ALTITUDE

EXACERBATING
FACTORS

EXAMPLE FLIGHT
VEHICLES

HAZARD

PRESENT DAY JET
AIRCRAFT
[6 - 10 miles altitude]

Commercial Airlines,
Corporate and
Military Aircraft

Cosmic Rays,
Solar Protons

Polar Routes,
CMEs

NEXT GENERATION JET
AIRCRAFT
[10 - 12 miles]

Commercial airlines,
military aircraft

Cosmic rays,
solar protons

Polar Routes,
CMEs

EARTH ORBITS BELOW
THE MAGNETOSPHERE:
Low Earth Orbits (leo)
[150 - 500 miles] at low
latitudes

Space Shuttle,
Hubble Space
Telescope
(375 mis)

Cosmic rays,
solar x-rays and
protons,
trapped particles

SAA, EVAs, CMEs,
MAG STORMS

LOW EARTH ORBITS
(leo) at higher latitudes
[150 - 500 miles]

International
Space Station

Cosmic rays,
solar x-rays and
protons, trapped
particles

SAA, EVA, CMEs,
MAG Storms

Fleet of GPS
Spacecraft

Trapped
particles,
solar x-rays and
protons, cosmic
rays

MAG Storms,
CMEs

SPACE TRAVEL WITHIN
THE RADIATION BELTS:
GeoSynchronous Orbits
(Geo) [22,200 miles]

Telecommunications
Satellites; Manned
Spacecraft en route
to the Moon or Mars

Cosmic rays,
solar protons,
trapped particles

MAG Storms,
CMEs

SPACE TRAVEL BEYOND
THE MAGNETOSPHERE:
Enroute to, or on the
surface of the Moon

Apollo Spacecraft
and Lunar Modules;
Planned Missions
to the Moon

Cosmic rays,
solar x-rays
and protons

Duration,
EVAs, CMEs

ENROUTE TO, OR ON
THE SURFACE OF MARS

Projected Human
Exploration of Mars

Cosmic rays,
solar x-rays and
protons

Duration,
EVAs, CMEs

EARTH ORBITS IN CLOSE
PROXIMITY TO THE
LOWER RADIATION BELT:
Medium Earth Orbits
(MEO) [16,000 miles]

LEGEND
CMEs
		
EVAs
		
MAG
		
Polar Routes
SAA
		
Duration

Defined in the
Legend Below

During or following a major solar flare or CME
During extra-vehicular activity of any kind
Occurrence of a major geomagnetic storm
Aircraft flights that cross polar or high latitude regions
Passage through the South Atlantic (magnetic) Anomaly
Manned space missions of long duration

Among the affected are the Space Shuttle, the International Space Station, and
a large number of other unmanned spacecraft. As an example, one of the
instruments on the Hubble Space Telescope was found to be so disrupted in
passage through the SAA that it was routinely switched off during each of the
Hubble’s brief passages through this zone.

175
Back to Table of Contents

The Physiological Effects of Ionizing Radiation

T

he risks of exposure to very energetic atomic particles lie in their ability
to tear electrons from (or ionize) atoms in cells that make up human tissue.
Because of this, cosmic rays, solar energetic particles and even solar x-rays are
often described as ionizing radiation (to distinguish their effects from those of
solar electromagnetic radiation in the infrared, visible, ultraviolet portions of the
spectrum.) They can do this whether or not the impacting particles carry an
electric charge.
The ability of speeding atomic particles to strip electrons from atoms in living
tissue depends chiefly on their energy. In terms of their effect on life, the chargeless neutrons that are released as secondary cosmic rays pose as great a hazard as
particles of equal energy that carry a positive or negative charge.
When neutral atoms in living cells are ionized, the chromosomes and DNA
within them are altered in ways that can lead to cellular mutations and the risk
of cancer.
Exposure to extreme doses of ionizing radiation can produce other, more
immediate effects: skin burns which are slow to heal, cataracts, nausea,
vomiting, damage to the nervous system, and depletion of the immune system.
In short: the symptoms of radiation sickness experienced by cancer patients
receiving radiation therapy, or more severely by the many victims of atomic
bomb explosions over Hiroshima and Nagasaki some sixty years ago.

The Importance of Dosage

T

he extent to which those in exposed aircraft flights or in space are ultimately
affected is determined by both the amount of radiation received at any time (as
during a medical x-ray, or a half hour’s exposure to solar energetic particles)
and the cumulative total of ionizing radiation encountered in the course of
one’s life.
				
We all receive some ionizing radiation every year, no matter where we live or
what we do. Should we undergo medical or dental x-rays, we are exposed to a
brief and localized dose. More significant in most cases is an ever-present dose
of ionizing radiation from some of the rocks and minerals and soils that are
beneath and all around us, from which in the course of a year it is possible to
accumulate a dosage of up to ten medical x-rays.
176

Aircraft crews and passengers receive a small amount of potentially-damaging
radiation in every flight that crosses polar and sub-polar regions, which include
most non-stop flights to and from Asia from northern American airports and
many to destinations in northern Europe. Astronauts are exposed to greater
levels from cosmic rays and other energetic particles each time they venture
into space.
The recommended maximum annual dosage for anyone is equal to about ten
medical x-rays. A round-trip flight over a polar route between New York to
Hong Kong will on average accrue an exposure equivalent to about two of
them. In space the dosage increases dramatically: from cosmic rays, solar
energetic particles and from energetic particles trapped in the Earth’s radiation
belts. The total dosage is a function of the flight path, the time spent in EVAs,
the state of solar activity, and the overall duration of the space flight.
				
Almost all manned space flights, including the relatively short flights of the
Space Shuttle and the far longer stays on the Space Station, have remained at
altitudes of no more than about 300 miles above the surface: well below the
Earth’s radiation belts and also, for most solar particles, within the protection
of the Earth’s magnetosphere.
Under these circumstances the cumulative exposure to ionizing radiation of
those on board—though much greater than what we receive on the ground or
the air—has been shown to be of little consequence, and as yet, no cause for
alarm. For example, exposure to cosmic rays during a record one-year stay in
low Earth orbit aboard the Mir spacecraft was estimated to increase the risk of
future cancer for cosmonauts on board by about one percent. Experience has
shown that under ordinary solar conditions, orbital flight below the level of the
radiation belts and magnetosphere are not a major health concern.
However, for a manned spacecraft traveling beyond the magnetosphere during
a particularly intense solar flare, or worse, during a long-lasting CME particle
event, the ionizing radiation received each hour within the spacecraft can equal
that of six or seven thousand chest x-rays, with even greater consequences if
caught outside, on EVA.
This has yet to happen, but it could have and almost did during the five-year
period of NASA’s manned Apollo missions to the Moon: eleven flights, each
lasting from ten to fourteen days, which for the first time carried human cargo
beyond the protection of the magnetosphere and into the full force of solar and
cosmic particles.
177
Back to Table of Contents

The Disaster That Almost Happened

T

he first, last and only space ventures of this kind were the nine Apollo
missions conducted in late 1968 through early 1972, each of which completed
the 480,000 mile voyage to the Moon and back.
Off and on in this 51-month period—which followed the peak of a
moderately strong sunspot cycle—25 astronauts, on flights spaced on
average about six months apart, lived and worked in deep space, shielded
only by the Apollo command module spacecraft and the smaller and the less
shielded lunar lander.
Manned Space Flights THAT have gone
beyond the Magnetosphere
mission
Apollo 8
Apollo 10
Apollo 11
Apollo 12

crew
F. Borman
J. Lovell
W. Anders
E. Cernan
J. Young
T. Stafford
N. Armstrong
M. Collins
E. Aldrin
C. Conrad
R. Gordon
A. Bean

Launch
date

Time spent in
deep space

Time spent
on the Moon

1968 Oct 11

6 days

None

1969 May 18

8 days

None

1969 July 16

7 days

21 hrs, 36 mins

1969 Nov 14

10 days

31 hrs, 31 mins

Apollo 13

J. Lovell
F. Haise
J. Swigert

1970 Apr 11

6 days

None

Apollo 14

A. Shephard
S. Roosa
J. Mitchell

1971 Jan 31

9 days

33 hrs, 31 mins

1971 July 26

12 days

66 hrs, 55 mins

1972 Apr 16

12 days

71 hrs, 2 mins

1972 Dec 7

13 days

75 hrs

Apollo 15
Apollo 16
Apollo 17

D. Scott
A. Worden
J. Irwin
J. Young*
T. Mattingly
C. Duke
E. Cernan*
R. Evans
H. Schmitt

*Crewed Apollo 10 as well

In all, these nine bold missions kept astronauts immersed in this unknown and
potentially hazardous environment for a total time of almost three months. In
terms of possible major impacts from the Sun, the one to two-week missions
placed these deep-space travelers in harm’s way for about 6% of the time during
a 51-month period of moderate activity in the life of the Sun: the intervals
depicted with blue diamonds in the following chart.
178

APOLLO MANNED FLIGHTS TO THE MOON
OCTOBER 1968 – DECEMBER 1972
Showing Months

in which

Apollo Astronauts spent one to two weeks in deep space,
October
1968
8

and the number of months
10

11

12

13

Apollo 14

between missions
15

16

December
1972
17

In addition, for a total time of 12½ days men lived and worked on the wholly
unprotected surface of the Moon. And although they never wandered far from
the lunar lander, it would have offered no protection at all against extremely
energetic solar particles that rained down on the surface of the Moon. The only
safe place would have been against a shaded, sloping wall of a lunar crater, were
such a refuge close at hand. Even then, a place in the shade would not offer full
protection against incoming charged particles from the Sun, since the earliest
particles arrive along curved paths and the others from all directions (other
than up from the ground), as a result of scattering by magnetic fluctuations
encountered en route from the Sun.
While many smaller flares and unseen CMEs occurred during the period of the
Apollo flights, there was but one anomalously-large solar proton event.
				
In early August of 1972, well into the declining phase of solar cycle 20 and about
midway in the four-month down time between the Apollo 16 and 17 missions,
the Sun displayed an abrupt and unexpected increase in solar magnetic activity.
The result was ten days that shook the world: intense solar flares and CMEs,
one after another. From this prolonged barrage came a steady stream of solar
energetic protons (SEPs) that provoked magnetic storms, auroral displays, and
severe disruptions of radio communications and electric power transmission.
Solar flares most often last for a matter of minutes followed by more extended
particle showers that arrive at Earth several days later. But the super flare that
was seen on the Sun in the early morning of Monday, August 7, 1972 lasted
more than four hours, making it one of the largest and most intense of any that
have ever been observed. In the same 10-day period CMEs showered the Earth
for extended periods of time. This combination of intense flares and CMEs
exposed our planet in those few days in early August to record-breaking levels
of high-energy particles.
179
Back to Table of Contents

Solely by chance, the Apollo 16 mission had returned safely from the Moon
about four months before, on April 27; and the next and last of the series,
Apollo 17, left for the Moon about four months later, on December 7.
Had there been a significant delay in Apollo 16, a moved-up Apollo 17—or had
the Sun erupted as severely but a few months earlier or later—the three astronauts
on board would have been exposed for hours or even days to potentially lethal
ionizing radiation, whether they were at the time within the command module,
the less shielded lunar lander, or on the surface of the Moon.
				
The heaviest dose during this period would have come principally from longlasting streams of energetic protons from CMEs, combined with the shorter
exposure to similar particles from the August 7 flare. During the first half-day
of their exposure to atomic particles from that one event, the Apollo astronauts
would have exceeded the recommended maximum yearly dosage of radiation
to the eyes and internal organs and the maximum lifetime dosage to the skin.
As a result of this exposure they would almost certainly have experienced severe
symptoms of radiation sickness, which for some or all of the three adventurers
could have proven fatal.
The initial blast of high-energy protons from so intense a flare would have
reached the spacecraft and the surface of the Moon within twenty minutes
after the visible explosion was seen at solar observatories around the world. But
the actual warning time for the Apollo astronauts would have been reduced to
less than twelve, because of the time it takes for the light that announced the
flare to reach the Earth. Moreover much or all of this would have been spent
in human reaction and response times, and in communications among solar
observers, flight controllers, and the spacecraft crew.
In these few minutes what must be evaluated is first the relative intensity of the
flare; second, whether particles expected from it are likely to strike the EarthMoon vicinity; and third, the nature of the risk to Apollo astronauts and the
mission itself.
At the very most the astronauts might have had a few short minutes to find
whatever cover they could, before the first wave of particles came upon them.
In the command module—or worse, the lunar lander—there would have been
no place to hide from the most energetic solar particles. Were they working on
the surface of the Moon when the urgent warning was received, they would
have found only limited protection from the first-arriving particles were they
to hide behind a shaded wall of a lunar crater, for reasons cited earlier. But this
180

is not the case for the many others that follow the initial blast. These particles,
which can arrive over many hours or days in the case of CMEs, are deflected or
scattered by fluctuations in the heliosphere and hence arrive from all directions
in the sky.
				
Presently-planned round-trip flights to the Moon, probably lasting about two
weeks, and the far longer stays envisioned in the recent decision to establish
a permanent base there will again carry the potential of severe hazards from
ionizing radiation: because of the period of time spent outside the Earth’s
atmosphere and magnetosphere; the finite probability in most seasons of the
solar cycle of intense flares or CMEs; and the engineering challenges involved
in providing adequate shielding against GCRs and the most energetic solar
protons while in deep space.
Envisioned trips to Mars, lasting from two to three years and with stays of
up to eighteen months on the exposed Martian surface, present problems far
more severe. This is in part because astronauts would be exposed to the full
fury of the Sun not 6% of the time, as was the case in the four years of Apollo
flights, but all of the time through a continuous period of three to four years, in
addition to the continuous exposure to very high energy galactic cosmic rays.
The greater risk to life and health on any extended mission beyond the Earth’s
atmosphere will be the accumulated dosage of galactic cosmic rays that are
more energetic by far than solar particles and which arrive from everywhere,
every day and around the clock. In addition, on excursions as long as these—50
to 75 times longer than those to the Moon—the voyagers are almost certain to
experience at least one and more likely several major solar flares, and countless
CMEs that accelerate high-speed solar wind particles to very high energies.
				
To avoid the certain hazard of prolonged cosmic ray exposure—and to reduce
the odds of a solar catastrophe—long missions, particularly, will require a
practical solution to the yet-unsolved problem of providing adequate shielding.
The first that comes to mind is probably that of sheathing the spacecraft living
quarters in heavy metal many inches thick, or a blanket of water at least 15
feet deep with a mass of more than 500 tons, which is nearly 20 times what
the present space shuttle can carry. Technical and weight considerations also
pose severe engineering challenges for the notion of containing the spacecraft
in its own protective magnetic field, which would need to be more than half a
million times stronger than the Earth’s field for shielding against GCRs.
181
Back to Table of Contents

Other options, now under study or consideration include the development of
much larger rockets that would reduce exposure by speeding the journey to
and from the Moon or Mars, and a proposal to enclose the inhabited portion
of the manned spacecraft within a protective shell formed by a wrap-around
cluster of long cylindrical tanks filled with liquid hydrogen. The nucleus of
each hydrogen atom is a single proton, which is a relatively efficient absorber
of some of the kinetic energy of particles—like cosmic rays—that happen to
collide with it. By this scheme, the heavy cargo of liquid hydrogen fuel that
must be taken along to lift the returning spacecraft from the surface of Mars
would serve an additional, second purpose: as a partial buffer to protect against
high energy cosmic rays during both the long outward voyage and the even
longer stay on Mars. But all of these are as yet untried.
The serious threat of lengthy exposures to high energy cosmic rays—and
the difficulty of shielding against them—may indeed make it more prudent
to schedule extended manned missions like those to Mars during years of
high rather than low solar activity. The bases for this are that when the Sun
is most active the flux of galactic cosmic rays drops by 20% or so; and the
fact that particles accelerated by CMEs and from flares—while considerably
more prevalent then—are less energetic and therefore relatively easier to
shield against.
The hazards of lethal cosmic rays may prove to be the principal obstacle to
extended manned missions of any kind, including long-envisioned human
exploration and colonization of the cosmos.

Impacts on Spacecraft, Space Equipment and on
Observations of the Earth From Space

All things launched into space enter a hostile world. When a spacecraft reaches

the exosphere—at an altitude of about 300 miles—it is directly exposed to
EUV and x-ray radiation. As it continues its upward path—first within and
then beyond the magnetosphere—it is more fully exposed to high energy solar
particles; to the piercing rain of even more energetic atomic particles from
distant cosmic eruptions; to violent gusts in the solar wind; and to sudden and
potentially catastrophic bursts of highly energized atomic particles from solar
flares and CMEs: the hurricanes and tsunamis of the heliosphere.
There are today some 850 spacecraft operating within this exposed environment,
put there at a total cost of more than 100 billion dollars to serve military, civic,
scientific, and commercial needs. The U.S. now owns or operates slightly more
than half of these.
182

About 100 are there to support national security, surveillance, and military
operations. A similar number gather unclassified data on all aspects of
the Earth and space for the various federal agencies, including NOAA’s
weather and climate services, NASA, and the Departments of Agriculture
and the Interior. But by far the largest fraction fall in neither of these two
categories, but within the commercial sector, serving the burgeoning satellite
communications industry.
Interruptions, or significant damage of any kind to this combined fleet of
spacecraft can directly affect many aspects of modern life, and they happen
all the time. Among the impacted areas are meteorological, oceanographic
and geophysical observations taken from instrumented spacecraft, including
the pictures of clouds and weather systems seen on cable or the nightly news;
satellite telephones and most telephone land lines; geographic positioning
systems; the relayed signals that allow broadcast television and satellite radio,
police and emergency communications and the transfer and rapid exchange of
commercial information involving transactions such as credit card purchases,
stock exchanges, and automated teller machines; marine and aircraft navigation
and aircraft traffic control; police and emergency communications; and a host
of national security functions, including the minute-by-minute tracking of
satellites and space debris.
				
Bursts of energized electrons, protons and heavier ions from solar flares and
CMEs are fully capable of damaging or disrupting the operation of many
common components of space equipment. Among them are circuit boards,
computers, computer software and storage devices, electrical and electronic
cabling, solar cells, and photo-sensors. The same can happen when streams of
high-speed solar wind provoke geomagnetic storms; when the spacecraft finds
itself near or within the Earth’s radiation belts; or from the continuous barrage
of high-energy cosmic rays.
As noted earlier, the cost-driven shift from custom-produced “hardened”
components to those bought off the shelf has greatly increased the vulnerability
of spacecraft and space equipment to solar events. As has the trend toward
miniaturization of computers and other electronic instruments.
Individual components of computer and other micro-electronic equipment
are—unlike our own bodies—vulnerable to single particle events, with
immediate impacts on the system in which that element is a part. In contrast,
the primary concern in manned space flight is not so much individual events
but the accumulated dosage of ionizing radiation.
183
Back to Table of Contents

Times of Particular Hazard

Because flares and the fastest CMEs occur more often when the Sun is more

active, the most vulnerable times for spacecraft and space equipment—whether
in orbit around the Earth or far beyond it—are the four or five years during
and following the peak of the 11-year cycle, when solar eruptions sufficiently
large to disrupt satellite operations will occur as much as 15% of the time. The
effects of satellite drag are also greatest in years of high solar activity.

At the same time, while far more frequent when the Sun is more active, there is
no respite from CMEs, which occur throughout the solar cycle. What is more,
high-speed streams of plasma in the solar wind, which can accelerate charged
particles in the Earth’s radiation belts, are more prevalent when the Sun is less
active. Because of this, potential damage to spacecraft and space equipment,
though greater in years of maximum activity, is possible in all phases of the
solar cycle.
Spacecraft that travel beyond the protection of the upper atmosphere and
magnetosphere face an abrupt jump in the number of potentially-damaging
solar particles when CMEs and flares occur. For those within the protection
of the magnetosphere—where most spacecraft operate—these impulsive solar
events can exert a similar effect, either directly or by increasing the numbers of
energetic particles held within Earth’s radiation belts.
CMEs also reshape the form of the magnetospheric shield, pushing it closer
to the Earth on the Sun-facing side and blowing the cover, in a sense, for
spacecraft in higher, geosynchronous orbits at altitudes of about 22,200 miles.
These and high-speed solar wind streams can also provoke magnetic storms by
accelerating particles in the Earth’s inner radiation belt.

Flight Paths of Greatest Risk

The level of risk to spacecraft and space equipment is very much dependent

where they operate. The most hazardous are trajectories that take it (1) into
or near the radiation belts; (2) beyond the Earth’s magnetic field; (3) in polar
orbits; or (4) in any inclined, equatorial orbit that passes through either
sub-polar regions or the South Atlantic Anomaly, where the Earth’s field is
notably weaker.
By far the most hazardous are those that spend time in the heart of the Earth’s
radiation belts or leave the protections of the Earth altogether. In addition to
past and planned manned missions to the Moon and possibly to Mars, these
184

include the many unmanned spacecraft that have been sent out to explore and
monitor conditions in near-Earth space, and those commissioned as remote
explorers of the Moon and planets and other objects within and beyond the
solar system.

Spacecraft at the Lagrangian Points of the
Sun-Earth System

Other instrumented spacecraft operate in high-Earth orbits that take them far

beyond the outer periphery of the magnetosphere. The Solar and Heliospheric
Observatory, or SOHO, has for more than ten years circled the Sun at a fixed
distance from the Earth of about 940,000 miles—about 1% of the distance to
the Sun—while always remaining on the Sun-Earth line.
The ACE (Advanced Composition Explorer) satellite, which samples conditions
in the solar wind and gives advance early-warnings of conditions within
approaching streams of solar particles, is another spacecraft that operates at
this unique and faraway location: a place of neutral gravity between the Sun
and the Earth-Moon system known as the L1 Lagrangian point, in honor of its
predictor, the French mathematician Joseph-Luis Lagrange (1736-1813).
It was Lagrange’s solution to a theoretical problem in mathematics that identified
five unique “neutral points” in the combined gravitational fields of the Sun and
the Earth-Moon system where a body should experience no net gravitational
force. The most accessible of these, today known as L1, was empirically tested
and put to practical use for the first time 184 years after his death.
At this place and distance the pulls of gravity from the closer and lighter Earth
and Moon are neutralized by the gravitational tug in the opposite direction from
the massive but more distant Sun. Here a spacecraft is in essence weightless,
neither drawn back to the Earth nor from it toward the Sun. And with no place
to fall, if brought to a stop it will remain in that vicinity: as though fixed to a
rigid spoke that connects the center of the Earth to the Sun.
The pulls of gravity at the Lagrangian points are not perfectly stable, however,
due to the non-circularity of both the orbit of the Earth and that of the Moon.
As a result, spacecraft such as SOHO and ACE trace out small orbits of their
own, with periods of about six months, that are centered on the L1 point. The
cost of these orbital imperfections on the operation of spacecraft residing there
is a need to spend on-board fuel to make minor corrections in their position,
in order to keep them on station, lest they drift beyond the L1 zone into their
own independent orbit around the Sun.
185
Back to Table of Contents

				
A distinctive set of more than 200 minor planets called the Trojan asteroids
are among other astronomical bodies that have long been affected by the
mathematical singularities that Lagrange discovered. In the asteroid case the
two objects whose gravitational attractions balance each other at five Lagrangian
points are the Sun and Jupiter. The Trojan asteroids circle the Sun like Jupiter,
in roughly 12-year orbits, held in the vicinity of the L1 Lagrangian point in
this other three-body system. They too are made to oscillate in small circles
about that mathematical point, due in part to the gravitational disturbances of
the many moons of Jupiter.

Polar Orbits and the South Atlantic Anomaly

W

hen spacecraft in polar orbits pass through regions where open field lines
extend outward from the magnetic poles of the Earth they cross a region where
potentially-damaging atomic particles make their way down into the upper
atmosphere. Also in harm’s way are those in inclined equatorial orbits that
carry them through the South Atlantic Anomaly, where an enfeebled magnetic
field allows the Earth’s inner radiation belt to expand downward into their
range of altitude.

Geosynchronous and Geostationary Orbits

T

he most vulnerable of flight trajectories that are kept within the protective
arms of the magnetosphere are the geosynchronous and geostationary orbits at
an altitude of 22,200 miles that keep spacecraft above a specific region on the
Earth’s surface. Included in these is the ever-growing number of commercial
telecommunications satellites, as well as many scientific and other payloads.
Under most conditions, spacecraft at this altitude operate at the outer edge of
the outer radiation belt.
In contrast, the safest of all flights in space—in terms of potential impacts of
high energy particles on spacecraft, equipment and spacecraft operation—are
shorter missions that operate in low-Earth orbits (at altitudes of 120 to 300
miles) during years of minima in the 11-year solar cycle. An example was the
historic, first flight of John Glenn, who circled the Earth, alone, in a Project
Mercury capsule at low latitudes for six hours on the 20th day of February in
1962, well into the declining phase of solar cycle 19.

186

ORBITAL ALTITUDES OF SPACECRAFT IN RELATION TO
PROXIMATE ATMOSPHERIC FEATURES
FEATURE

SPACECRAFT ORBIT
Bottom of F Region in Ionosphere

DISTANCE
ABOVE THE
EARTH’S
SURFACE
IN MILES
90

Height of Auroral Displays

DISTANCE
FROM
CENTER OF
THE EARTH
IN EARTH
RADII
1.02

170 - 360

1.04 – 1.09

Low-Earth Orbits (LEO)

≤ 1200

≤ 1.3

Space Shuttle
International Space Station
Hubble Space Telescope

250

1.06

650

1.2

Medium Earth Orbits (MEO):
GPS Transmitters

6000 –
16,000

2.5 - 5

Inner Radiation Belt

650 –
12,000

1.2 –3.0

Gap between Inner and Outer Belts

12,000 –
16,000

3-4

Outer Radiation Belt

16,000 –
24,000

4–6
or more

Top of F Region

Geosynchronous Earth Orbits (GEO):
Weather Satellites
Telecommunications Satellites

22,200

6.6

Spacecraft Operating at L1 Lagrangian Point:
SOHO (Sun Imaging Spacecraft)
ACE (First Sentinel Spacecraft)

930,000

234

Destructive Particles From the Sun and the
Earth’s Radiation Belts

As with projectiles fired from a gun, the most destructive of atomic particles
are the largest, heaviest and fastest moving.

Protons, which are about 2000 times heavier than electrons, are the most
common ions released from solar flares and CMEs. When accelerated to speeds
that approach half the velocity of light—which happens in major flares and
CME-driven shocks—they are hard to stop and extremely destructive.
When an atom of hydrogen (consisting of one proton, one electron and
nothing else) is ionized, its single electron is torn away from the positivelycharged proton to which it was bound. Since hydrogen is far and away the
most abundant element in the Sun—90% by number, 70% by weight—it is
187
Back to Table of Contents

no surprise that protons comprise so large a fraction of the energetic particles
thrown off from the Sun, or that they are the leading agents of disruption and
damage to spacecraft and space equipment.
Heavier solar particles, including ionized helium (alpha particles) or the
electron-stripped atoms of other elements, are also ejected. The heaviest of
charge-accelerated solar particles—the cannonballs of solar projectiles—are
ionized atoms of iron, which, though their speeds are not as great, can be more
than fifty times heavier than protons.
Other potentially-damaging particles come from the hordes that are trapped
and held in the Earth’s radiation belts. Some of these came from the Sun, in the
solar wind or from violent solar eruptions.
But mixed among them are an equal or greater number that entered the
radiation belts not from other worlds but from our own: migrant electrons,
protons and heavier ions from the ionosphere and thermosphere that diffused
upward, and because of their electrical charge, were captured and held in the
magnetosphere. The disturbances that set any of these charged particles free
are geomagnetic storms triggered by solar eruptions or streams of high-velocity
solar wind that for a brief time disrupt the bonds that held them there.

Cosmic Rays

Galactic cosmic rays are the most energetic of particles found in space. The

most prevalent are high-energy protons, but as with particles from the Sun,
there are also much heavier ions, ranging from the nuclei of helium atoms
(atomic weight four, or four times the weight of a proton) to the relatively
abundant ions of iron (weight 56). And they travel outward at speeds that can
considerably exceed most particles of solar origin.
The reason for the great energies and high speeds of cosmic rays, and why
they include heavy ions such as iron, nickel and zinc, is that they are propelled
outward from cataclysms far more violent than any large solar flare—or a
thousand of them set off all at once. The source of most cosmic rays is thought to
be the explosion—long ago and far away—of an entire star, called a supernova:
as though the star we live with were one day suddenly and unexpectedly blown
to bits.
A cosmic catastrophe of this scale releases an almost unimaginable amount
of energy all at once, propelling extremely energized electrons, protons and
heavier ions at phenomenal speeds in all directions through all of space.
188

Because of their high energies, it is nearly impossible to shield a spacecraft,
a computer, other space equipment, and any human passengers against
them, since those of highest energies can pass through many inches of
heavy metal. They are also nearly impossible to avoid, for cosmic rays are
everywhere throughout the universe, and arrive in the solar system—but
little slowed after tens of thousands of years of travel—in a cross fire of
killer rays, coming from all directions.

Atmospheric Drag

Spacecraft operations are also directly affected by the two- to ten-fold increase
in solar EUV and x-ray radiation in years when the Sun is more active.

When radiation in this short-wave region of the solar spectrum is absorbed by
atoms of air in the thermosphere it raises the temperature there. In response,
the thermosphere swells, expanding upward into regions of the more diffuse
exosphere where spacecraft in low-Earth orbits fly.
This intrusion of denser air from the thermosphere increases the friction—or
drag—on spacecraft that travel through it. The added drag slightly slows the
space vehicle, causing it to drop to a lower altitude. There the air is even more
dense, leading to a compounding effect on spacecraft altitude.
Unless the spacecraft is boosted to a higher operating altitude—at the cost
of some of its limited supply of orbital control fuel—this chain of events will
inexorably pull the spacecraft down into the far denser middle and lower
atmosphere of the Earth, where increased friction will ultimately tear it apart.
As the thermosphere expands, the rising tide affects all boats that orbit the
Earth below an altitude of about 1000 miles. The Hubble Space Telescope and
Space Station are among many spacecraft that have made orbital corrections
using control jets to compensate for the changing moods of the Sun: as they
soon will again, as solar activity begins its climb toward a maximum of solar
cycle #24 in about 2013.
These thermospheric expansions occur in response to both the year-to-year
cyclic rise in solar activity and—on scales of hours to days—the intense bursts
of short-wave radiation from major solar flares.
The increased atmospheric drag that accompanied the Bastille Day flare of
July 14, 2000 led to the immediate demise of Japan’s Advanced Satellite for
Cosmology and Astrophysics (ASCA) by disabling its ability to maintain its
189
Back to Table of Contents

orientation in space. This sent it into a catastrophic spin that led to a total
loss of power, since the spacecraft could no longer keep its solar power panels
directed toward the Sun.
				
Skylab, the first manned space station, fell victim to the very object—the
Sun—which it had been built and launched to observe, as a result of a year-byyear increase in thermospheric drag.
Carrying a battery of six of the most advanced telescopes ever pointed at the
Sun, Skylab was lofted into low-Earth orbit in 1973, during the declining
phase of solar cycle #20. Through the efforts of ground controllers and three
successive teams of three astronauts—who relieved each other in space at the
end of prolonged stays—the spacecraft and its crews completed its ambitious
mission within eight months.
On the 8th of February 1974 the third, last and longest-staying crew turned
out the lights, closed the door and returned to Earth in the space capsule that
had brought the first team there. The abandoned spacecraft—as big as a boxcar
and weighing about as much—was left behind to circle the Earth: a ghost ship
like the Mary Celeste, which was found adrift in mid-ocean in 1872, fully laden
and with no one on board.
In 1975, magnetic activity on the surface of the Sun began an extremely steep
rise, climbing to the unusually high maximum of solar cycle #21 that was
reached three years later, in 1978. The steep increase in solar activity brought
an ever-increasing dose of short-wave radiation from the Sun, swelling the
thermosphere and dragging the abandoned Skylab farther and farther down
into the atmosphere: much faster than what had been anticipated.
In 1979, two years before the completion of the first Space Shuttle—which, had
it been ready, could have been sent to boost the sinking spacecraft into a higher
and safer orbit—the abandoned Skylab spiraled downward, out of control
into the dense air of the lower atmosphere. There the most sophisticated and
expensive solar observatory in the world broke apart into chunks, large and
small, which fell to the ground: by good fortune over an uninhabited stretch
of the Australian desert.

190

Impacts on Micro-Circuits and		
Computer Systems

High levels of electrostatic charge—created through contact with energized

electrons—accumulate on the outer surface of a spacecraft as it passes through
the Earth’s radiation belts, during geomagnetic storms, and particularly when
immersed in low-density plasma. The amount of charge deposited on the skin of
the spacecraft will vary from one place or one material to another, establishing
a difference in electric potential between them. This voltage difference can
provoke electrical discharges—not unlike strokes of lightning—between
different areas on the spacecraft, or between the different materials that are
employed for thermal control.
Free electrons in space can also induce electrical charges on cable insulation
and other non-conducting materials within the spacecraft, leading to similar
and more harmful electrical discharges there. The effects can seriously damage
components and subsystems, burn out power supplies and set off automatic
commands in the spacecraft control system.
Highly energetic atomic particles—and most especially trapped electrons in the
radiation belts—are able to penetrate the protective shell of a spacecraft and
induce deeper electrical charges within electronic and computer components
that can cause malfunctions, serious damage and even equipment failure.
In passing through the spacecraft, its computers and other equipment, high
energy particles will also ionize some of the material through which they travel,
leaving a trail of electrically-charged “particle tracks” across and through circuit
boards and other critical components. Intruding particles that are less energetic
can induce harmful surface charges on sensitive equipment. Spacecraft control
systems are among those affected by either deep-charging or space-charging,
leading to the possible loss of the spacecraft itself.
				
The thousands of spacecraft that have operated in space in the course of
the last half century have provided what is now a long record of equipment
malfunctions and failures, most of which are attributed to energetic electrons
trapped within the magnetosphere, solar energetic particles, and cosmic rays.
Such events are sufficiently common to be separated into different categories
of cause or effect.

191
Back to Table of Contents

Among the classifications routinely used are electrostatic discharges (ESD) due
to surface or deep dielectric charging, and several classes of single event effects
(SEE) that are traceable to a single high-energy particle. Most common among
the latter are single event upsets (SEU) in micro-circuits, which occur most
often when a heavy ion deposits enough charge on a sensitive circuit element
to cause it to change state: the equivalent of throwing a two-pole switch from
OFF to ON, or ON to OFF.
Single event upsets are a common cause of disruptions and even failures in
electronic equipment in space. Among the critical functions affected are the
spacecraft’s orbital control and stabilization system. A great many military and
commercial telecommunications satellites fly in geosynchronous orbits at an
altitude of about 22,200 miles above the Earth’s surface, near the outer edge of
the outer radiation belt, which makes all of them highly vulnerable to damage
from single event upsets. The galaxy of GPS spacecraft, which operate within
the outer radiation belt, are among those that have experienced many costly
upsets of this kind.

Damage to Other Space Equipment

M

ost spacecraft are powered by solar cells, which in space—as on Earth—
absorb radiative energy from the Sun in the visible and infrared regions of the
spectrum and convert it into voltage, and hence available electric power. But
when taken above the Earth’s atmosphere, solar cells are directly exposed to a
continuing barrage of high-energy atomic particles as well. These come not
only from the solar wind and solar eruptions and from more distant sources as
cosmic rays, but also from confined streams of highly energetic particles that
circle the Earth in the two radiation belts.
High-speed atomic particles that slam into the face of solar cells are like grains of
gravel thrown against the windshield of a speeding automobile, reducing their
transparency and hence efficiency in converting radiant to electrical energy.
Particles from a single, moderate intensity solar event can reduce the efficiency
of solar cells by about 3%, a drop sufficient to shorten the orbital lifetime of the
spacecraft. CMEs and a major flare on March 13, 1989 chopped years from the
designed lifetimes of more than a dozen satellites in geosynchronous orbits.
Among those affected by these events was a NOAA GOES weather satellite, one
of two then positioned over the western and eastern halves of the continental
U.S. to provide the pictures of clouds and storm systems seen daily on broadcast
television. In one day these great blasts from the Sun—whose direct effects on
192

the Earth were felt for about six hours—took about six years from the expected
lifetime of the spacecraft. Two years later, in October, 1991, other large CMEs
reduced the life of all three of the GOES spacecraft by about two years. As a
result, NOAA and NASA had to accelerate the funding, building, testing and
launching of replacements, years earlier than originally planned.
Incoming particles that pass through digital imaging devices, like telescopes
of various kinds, can cloud and obscure the image obtained. Any charged
particles can do this, including electrons and the many secondary particles that
are released internally when a more energetic particle, such as a solar proton,
strikes the material surrounding the detector. When a cloud of heavy ions
from a solar flare or CME-driven shock wave reaches a spaceborne telescope
that is pointed at the Sun, the electronic “noise” it produces can saturate the
photo-sensing element. Images recorded at these times look much like the view
through the windshield of an automobile driving at night in Wyoming through
a blizzard of blinding snow.

Protecting Against Damage From
High-Energy Particles

Before it enters the atmosphere, an accelerated electron can pass through

about a quarter inch of aluminum, and a solar proton at least some six times
farther, through an inch and a half or more. Thus the light-weight exterior
shells of most spacecraft provide little if any shielding against either of them.
As noted earlier, for galactic cosmic rays with energies in the range of a billion
electron volts (1 GeV) there is no practical brute-force method of shielding for
either the spacecraft or equipment within it, given the weight of thick, denser
metals like lead or steel. Thus galactic cosmic rays can shoot right through a
spacecraft, from top to bottom, side to side, or end to end. Nor will they be
stopped or significantly slowed by conventional materials that encase computers
and other vulnerable electronic equipment.
Another limitation in using metallic shielding is that of the secondary particles
that are produced when the primary high-energy particles are stopped within
it. At some point, depending on the thickness of the shielding material, these
secondary showers can create deleterious effects that surpass the potential
damage from higher-energy primaries.
Partial engineering solutions to these problems involve the classic trade-off
between insurance and its cost: in this case, between level of protection and
launch weight. In practice, while it is possible to shield against less energetic
193
Back to Table of Contents

particles, and to make greater use of more costly, radiation-hardened electronic
components, it is prohibitively expensive to provide 100% protection of any
complex spacecraft component or instrument against high-energy cosmic rays
and solar protons.
Most satellites today—due to their increased complexity, greater reliance on
micro-electronics, and increasing use of on-board data processing and storage—
are more susceptible to the perils of space weather than those of yesteryear. The
commercial use of space, in particular, calls for lower launching costs, lighter
spacecraft with even less shielding, and off-the-shelf components in place of
those that are radiation-hardened.
Since future spacecraft are likely to be smaller and lighter, and therefore
provide less redundancy and use even more-miniaturized and complex
electronic systems, they will be more vulnerable to the damaging effects of
high-energy atomic particles. In addition, with more telecommunications
satellites in high geosynchronous orbits and space missions of greater
complexity, more spacecraft will travel into harm’s way, beyond the greater
safety of low Earth orbits.
With these trends we can expect more frequent single event upsets and more
costly disruptions and failures in space operations.
				
There are four ways of minimizing radiation hazards to spacecraft and space
equipment. The first three—which in most cases prove costly or impractical—
are more shielding, greater redundancy, and a more conservative choice of
orbits and flight paths.
The fourth is earlier warnings of hazardous times and of specific solar and
magnetospheric events. Periods of expected high (or low) solar activity can be
foretold, as can the probabilities of solar flares, CMEs and geomagnetic storms.
More useful predictions and alerts depend upon the constant surveillance of the
Sun, from multiple spacecraft and vantage points. They also require advance
“sentinels” like the ACE spacecraft, stationed slightly closer to the Sun than we,
to sense and evaluate oncoming streams of plasma in the fast solar wind and
CMEs in order to extend the warning times of those most likely to impinge
upon the Earth.

194

Impacts on Telecommunications, GPS,
and Navigation

The electromagnetic waves that today carry information of all kinds are

everywhere and ever present in our lives: spreading not only around the world
but in some cases far beyond it, through the heliosphere and throughout
the Galaxy.
In but four hours, television programs broadcast to viewers in Chicago will
have already reached the orbit of Neptune, and in less than a day have spread
beyond the heliosphere to fill the wide open spaces where other stars abound.
Electromagnetic waves carrying live television programs featuring Jack Benny,
Red Skelton or Lucille Ball are at this time arriving at places more than fifty
light-years away, having already passed five of the twelve brightest stars in the
sky. Sirius, a near star that is the brightest of these, had its chance to watch
these classic broadcasts, live from the U.S.A., more than forty years ago.
				
Our use of electromagnetic waves to convey information was but a century ago
limited to telegraphy; for carrying voice messages from hand-cranked phones
over local telephone lines; and for the transmission of code or spoken words in
wireless radio messages within a limited segment of what was then called the
“short-wave” radio band.
The full extent of the radio-frequency spectrum—a range of wavelengths
spanning ten orders of magnitude and divided into nine frequency bands from
ultra-low (3000 cycles/second) to super-high (30 billion per second)—has now
been commandeered for modern needs. To meet the requirements of myriad
users, the nine frequency bands are now divided and subdivided into more
than a thousand separate but closely-packed segments—such as aeronautical
radio navigation, TV channels 7-13, or radio astronomy—each allocated by
international or federal commissions for a highly specific purpose.
Today, ordinary people rely on electromagnetic waves every day of every week
for cell, cordless or hard-wired telephones; to receive radio and television
broadcasts; for connections between computers and to the internet; and for
remotely locking the car, opening the garage door or a host of other wireless
applications. Electromagnetic waves are also used for an expanding list of civil,
military and commercial purposes, which range from the transfer of transactions
from automated teller machines and cash registers to communications of all
kinds between points on land, sea, in the air, and in space.
195
Back to Table of Contents

And most of them are vulnerable in one way or another to the changing moods
of the Sun.

Direct and Indirect Reception of Radio Waves

Radio waves sent outward from a broadcast TV tower or a cell-phone held
in your hand spread outward in expanding circles, like ripples on a pond: but
in this case in three dimensions and at the speed of light, 186,000 miles per
second. Like waves in water, their advance in any direction proceeds along
straight lines from the source.

This means that transmitted radio signals are unable to follow the curvature of
the Earth to continue like a bird or an airplane beyond the horizon. The limit
of their direct line of travel depends upon the height of the transmitter and the
lay of the land, but in most instances is considerably less than 100 miles. For
a person five or six feet tall standing on a flat reach of land, the horizon is less
than three miles away; and for a dachshund, it is very near at hand.
Electronic signals, including broadcast radio and TV, can be sent beyond the
horizon by the use of appropriately-sited relay stations and long-distance cables.
And more commonly today, by re-transmission from telecommunications
satellites from whose vantage point—more than 4000 miles high—the visible
horizon of the Earth extends for thousands of miles in all directions.
Signals sent outward in low frequency bands of the radio spectrum—including
among others, most amateur and all AM radio transmissions—are able
to make it beyond the horizon without added help by forward reflection
from the ionosphere: the electrically-conducting layers of free electrons and
ions in the upper atmosphere that lie far below the lofty heights at which
telecommunications satellites fly. Depending on its structure and density at
the time, the ionosphere can for other radio frequencies serve as a polished
mirror to allow them to go over the horizon and extend their range by repeated
reflections far beyond it.
				
It was through ionospheric reflections of this kind that in 1901, the twentyseven year-old Guglielmo Marconi sent the first wireless signal between the
Old World and the New, by successfully transmitting •• • , the three dots
of the letter S in Morse code from England, “round the protuberance of the
earth”, to a receiver in Newfoundland, more than a thousand miles away.

196

Today, with adequate power and the application of very low frequencies (using
wavelengths more than sixty miles long!), radio signals are bounced back and
forth in the space between the Earth and the lower ionosphere all the way
around the planet.
Electromagnetic signals transmitted in higher frequency bands—including the
segments of the radio spectrum allocated to satellite communications, GPS,
FM radio, and broadcast television—are not reflected by the ionosphere and
are thus able to pass through it with little attenuation, to continue outward into
space. This is why un-named, faraway planets can today receive live broadcasts
of I Love Lucy while a viewer in the 1950s, but tens of miles from a transmitter
located on the other side of a hill or down in a valley, could not.

Role of the Sun and Solar Variations

All of the telecommunications signals that pass through or are reflected by the

concentrated layers of electrons in the ionosphere are affected by the Sun and
solar variability, since it alone creates and sustains the ionosphere. Solar flares,
CMEs, and magnetic storms—the products of solar disturbances—provoke
abrupt and drastic changes in the ionosphere that can weaken, distort or
temporarily block signals which under other conditions would be more cleanly
reflected or allowed to pass.
The daily rotation of the Earth—carrying darkened regions of the globe into
and then out of the direct blast of solar short-wave radiation—forces dramatic
day-to-night changes in the density and structure of the ionosphere that exert
a major impact on the range of reception of radio signals.
Day-to-day changes in the level of magnetic activity on the Sun and hence in
the amount of short wave radiation received at the Earth alter the density of
free electrons in the ionosphere, as do year-to-year changes in the course of the
11-year solar cycle. These solar-driven variations in electron density control
not only the reflectivity of the ionosphere but its transparency and homogeneity
as well.
Satellite communications and all others which make use of satellite repeaters
rely on higher radio frequencies that are able to pass through the ionosphere.
But these too are subject to solar-driven perturbations that not only alter its
transparency to waves of different frequencies but also introduce irregularities
in its structure. The radio waves that pass through a rippled region of this kind
are distorted, introducing scintillations in the signal received, which are not
unlike the twinkling of a star.
197
Back to Table of Contents

Among the many telecommunications systems affected by changes in
ionospheric transparency and homogeneity are communications between
spacecraft and the ground; marine and aircraft navigation; GPS signals; guided
missile systems; and all applications, including satellite telephones and network
television that rely on satellite repeaters operating well above the ionosphere in
geosynchronous orbits.
Nor can the effects of the Sun on telecommunications be avoided by sending
signals along wires or through under-ground or under-sea cables. These too,
are affected by the Sun when CMEs and flares disturb the magnetosphere, and
through this link induce troublesome electric currents in long conductors of
any kind at or below the surface of the Earth

Impacts on GPS and Other Navigation Systems

The Navstar Global Positioning System—so extensively utilized today—

relies on a fleet of twenty-four GPS spacecraft, each equipped with radio
receiver-transmitters and atomic clocks. These circle the Earth at an altitude of
about 16,000 miles, about three-fourths as high as the geosynchronous orbits
(22,200 miles) where telecommunications satellites fly. At this height the GPS
spacecraft operate in an unfriendly world, immersed in swarms of energetic
electrons in the middle of the Earth’s outer radiation belt.
Whether on the ground, at sea, in an aircraft or on another spacecraft, a
GPS receiver can determine its own position based on the differences in the
elapsed times between the transmission and reception of signals from four
satellites in the GPS fleet, which utilize frequencies sufficiently high to pass
through the ionosphere.
The times of travel of the GPS-to-ground signals are affected by differences
in density in different regions of the ionosphere through which the four
transmitted signals pass. The precision of measurement is also affected by
ionospheric scintillations. While endeavors are made to compensate for at least
some of these effects, transient variations in ionospheric conditions can still
affect the accuracy of any GPS result. Errors of this nature are encountered
about 20% of the time during the years when the Sun is most active.
Because of the altitude and the region of near-Earth space in which it must
operate, the electronic equipment employed on GPS spacecraft is also highly
vulnerable to deep dielectric charging and other damaging effects from highenergy particles, which are thought responsible for many single-event upsets in
its operation.
198

The venerable Loran (Long Range Navigation) system that for more than sixty
years was maintained by the U.S. Coast Guard to serve navigators on ships at
sea, was based, like GPS, on differences between the times of receipt of radio
signals from two or more different radio transmitters. For Loran these signals
came, however, from fixed stations on land, and in order to reach distant vessels
far over the horizon were carried on very low radio frequencies that reach them
by repeated skips between the reflective ionosphere and the surface of the sea.
It too, was vulnerable to solar and magnetic disturbances which could abruptly
alter the density and reflective properties of the ionosphere and for a time thwart
attempts to use the system. Following the major solar flare of March 13, 1989,
for example, the system was effectively disabled for more than four hours.

Effects on Electric Power Transmission

The delivery of electric power to densely populated areas of the United

States has been severely disrupted or cut-off altogether on repeated occasions
in the past following large solar disturbances and major geomagnetic storms.
In several instances, the total costs of the solar-induced outages amounted
to tens of millions of dollars, and in one case reached the level of financial
losses encountered in the course of major floods and hurricanes. It has been
shown, moreover, that space weather conditions affect the wholesale market for
electricity even at times of reduced solar and geomagnetic activity.
The major disruption most often cited is the power blackout in the Province of
Quebec and electrically-linked regions of the northeastern U.S. that followed
the exceptionally large flare, CME and geomagnetic storm of March 13,
1989. While the 1989 power failure was unusually extensive and costly, other
disruptive events of the same nature and origin had been experienced before.
Solar disturbances that tripped transformer banks, damaged equipment and
disrupted electric power in wide areas had affected this country and Canada
in 1940, 1958, 1972, and later in 2000. In each case they followed major
magnetic storms and auroral displays in maximum years of the Sun’s 11-year
cycle. Similar solar conditions are next expected in the period from about 2011
to 2015.

199
Back to Table of Contents

The Power Blackout of 1989

The solar eruptions that initiated the chain of events that caused the

massive power failure in March 1989 came from an extremely extensive and
magnetically-complex region on the surface of Sun. This immense area—more
than 40,000 miles across and roughly half as wide—contained a tangle of very
strong and oppositely-charged magnetic regions, including a large collection of
sunspots, some of enormous size.
To solar observers who through telescopes saw this menacing collection
come around the eastern limb of the Sun, or watched the sunspots drift with
solar rotation toward the center of the solar disk, it must have seemed like
an approaching armada of gun-laden galleons sailing in tight formation. And
indeed, in their fourteen-day passage across the face of the Sun the assembled
group fired off nearly two thousand flares and lobbed at least three dozen large
CMEs outward toward the planets.
The impact on the Earth of the greatest of these CME eruptions was the largest
magnetic storm ever recorded, accompanied by colorful displays of the aurora
borealis seen far south of their expected limits in Canada and the northern
U.S.: this time reaching as far south as Southern California, Arizona and Texas
and on into Mexico, Central America and the islands of the Caribbean. In
Europe, where they are most often seen in the skies of northern Scandinavia,
aurorae appeared as far south as Spain, Portugal and Hungary.
But the geomagnetic storm that produced these awe-inspiring sights had quite
another impact on the electric power industry and its customers in Canada
and the northeastern U.S. There, where the brunt of the magnetic changes
were felt, it generated unwanted electrical currents at ground level that found
their way into transformers and power lines, disabling generators, destroying
equipment, and setting off a chain of disruption and system collapse. Hardest
hit and the epicenter of damage and destruction was the Hydro-Quebec Power
Company in the city of Quebec. It alone suffered losses in that one event of at
least ten million dollars, and its customers lost many tens of millions more.
The same storm caused power blackouts in quite separate places in the U.S.,
from Maryland to California and as far south as Arizona. Among the many
casualties was a massive ten million dollar transformer at a nuclear power plant
in New Jersey that was damaged beyond repair.
Effects of the 1989 super storm were also felt across the ocean in Sweden,
where equipment and power were also disrupted. It also touched neighboring
200

Finland, although there, the preventive care that had been paid to the design of
circuits and system elements kept them from sustaining damage or loss.

How Magnetic Storms Disrupt Power Systems

T

he impact of high-speed plasma clouds from the Sun on the Earth’s magnetic
field greatly increases the flow of electric current in both the magnetosphere
and ionosphere. And although sixty miles and more above the surface of the
Earth, variations in these upper atmospheric current systems provoke rapid
rates of change in the surface magnetic field of the planet, leading, in turn, to
marked differences in the electric potential at different locations on the surface
of the ground.
The electric potential of the Earth’s surface at places ten miles apart can differ
by as much as 160 volts. In time these inequalities will be gradually drained
away by a leakage of sub-surface electric currents passing through the weaklyconducting ground. But when grounded wires, sub-surface cables, pipelines,
iron railroad tracks or other metallic conductors happen to connect regions
of different surface potential together a short circuit ensues, much as when a
metallic object is inadvertently placed across the poles of a storage battery. The
sudden direct currents that instantly flow through these shunts of opportunity—
typically 10s to 100s of amperes—are known as geomagnetically-induced
currents or GICs.
When a direct current of this kind, passing (in the wrong direction!) up a
ground wire reaches the windings of a high voltage transformer at generating
plants or substations it initiates a chain of disruption. This includes transformer
saturation, overheating and other damaging effects that can ultimately trigger
protective relays throughout the system to which it is connected.
In extreme cases the effect can ripple through an entire electric power grid,
leading to a possible collapse of the network, pervasive power blackouts, and
permanent damage to the immense transformers and other large and seldomordered components, like large transformers, that are both very costly and very
slow to replace since they are individually manufactured on demand.

Where Solar-Driven Power Outages Most
Often Occur

Damaging GICs occur predominantly in higher-latitude regions where the

most violent magnetic disturbances occur and aurorae are most frequently seen.
In the U.S. they are most prevalent along the top two tiers of the connected
201
Back to Table of Contents

forty-eight states. In addition within the upper tier, the eastern half of the
U.S. is more likely to be hard hit by the effects of GICs than states west of the
Mississippi. This inequity stems from geological differences in the conductivity
of the subsoil in the two regions, which is more rocky in the Northeast and
hence more resistant to the flow of equalizing sub-surface electric currents; and
also from differences in population density.
North America, moreover, is more prone to damaging GICs than is northern
Europe or Asia, because of the present, western offset of the north magnetic
pole, that allows more incoming charged particles into the top of the western
world than at equivalent geographic latitudes in northern Europe and Asia.
Thus it is not by chance that so many of the severe solar-induced power
disruptions in the last sixty years have struck the eastern provinces of Canada,
and in this country, large metropolitan areas in the Northeast and North
central states. This is not to say that other regions are by geography immune.
The severe magnetic storm of August 4, 1972, for example, had direct impacts
in British Columbia and down into the U.S. Midwest.
Today the major determinant of where power blackouts will occur in our country
is not so much the present skewed location of the north magnetic pole or the
resistivity of the soil in rocky New England, but the extent of interconnected
electric power systems. With these much expanded grids—which now connect
high-prone Northeastern power plants and distribution systems all the way to
the Gulf States—no city is an island.
A magnetic storm as intense as the one that caused so much damage in the
Hydro-Quebec power system in 1989 would today affect a far larger area. In
this not-unlikely event, two vast sections of the U.S. would likely suffer a total
power system collapse, requiring days to bring the entire system back on line.
The first and largest of these would likely encompass most of the eastern states,
in an area reaching from Maine to northern Florida and extending westward
as far as St. Louis, Memphis and Birmingham. The second would include all
of Washington, Oregon and Idaho and parts of far-northern California and
Nevada. The probable cost to power companies alone of this one super event
has been estimated to be at least five billion dollars: a figure which would
be dwarfed by the total economic losses in the communities involved and
throughout the nation.

202

Some Major Electric Power Disruptions IN the U.S. and
Canada triggered by Severe Geomagnetic Storms
STORM DATE
1940
1958
1972
1989
2000
2003

March 24
February 10-11
August 4
March 13
July 14
October 29-30

AFFECTED AREA
Eastern Canada, Central and Northeastern U.S.
Eastern Canada, U.S. Upper Midwest
Western Canada, U.S. Upper Midwest
Southern Canada, Northern U.S.
North America
Northeastern U.S.

Effects of Geomagnetically-induced Currents on
the Cost of Electricity

Geomagnetically-induced currents provoked by solar activity and geomagnetic
storms can affect the price of electricity, regardless of the magnitude of the
disturbance, through a reduction in the ability of electric power distribution
systems to deliver low-cost power to areas of higher demand.

A recent study of a major Northeastern power grid serving almost 10% of the
population of this country found that the cost of GIC losses to consumers
amounted to about half a billion dollars in the 18-month period that was
examined. The price impact was not surprisingly a strong function of the
severity of the geomagnetic storm, but less intense storms also took their toll.
Following a major storm like that triggered by the Bastille Day flare and CMEs
of July 14, 2000 the wholesale price of electricity was more than doubled,
and the average over all geomagnetic disturbances, large or small, was a notinsignificant increase of 3.3%.

Early Signs of Solar Interference in
Communications

Pipelines and cables—whether on, above, or beneath the surface, or laid across

the ocean floor—can also be affected by geomagnetically-induced currents.
These too, are electrical conductors in a position to provide a short-circuit path
between separated surface areas of different electric potential.
In 1926, at a time when far more was known about sunspots than about
geomagnetically-induced currents, Guglielmo Marconi—then fifty-two and
still much involved in telecommunications—called attention to the fact that
the times when undersea cables and land-lines were thrown out of action
seemed always to coincide with the appearance of large sunspots and intense
aurorae. And that these were also times of frequent fading of high-frequency
wireless radio transmissions.
203
Back to Table of Contents

The occasional presence of “anomalous currents” in telegraph wires had been
commented upon as early as 1847, although at that time neither geomagneticallyinduced currents nor their solar and magnetospheric causes were known or
understood. Nor was it probably noted that 1847 marked the peak of the
11-year solar cycle (cycle #9) that ran between minima in 1843 and 1856.In
fact, at that early date very few people anywhere were aware of the Sun’s cyclic
behavior, even though Heinrich Schwabe had published his landmark paper
announcing that finding four years earlier, in 1843 in the scientific journal
Astronomische Nachrichten.
But few had read it at the time and fewer still were prepared to accept what
he claimed as fact. Schwabe’s Cinderella paper would have to wait four years
more, until 1852, when Doktor Professor Alexander von Humboldt— not
an amateur like Schwabe, but a celebrated professional scientist of world
renown—endorsed the pharmacist’s discovery by calling attention to it in his
four-volume series of widely-read popular books, entitled Cosmos: A Description
of the Universe. Then as now, for Schwabe (whose life was suddenly changed) it
was not so much what you knew, but whom you knew.

Some Effects of GICS on
Telecommunications Cables

Following the severe magnetic storm of February 11, 1958, telephone and

teletype signals carried in the first-ever transatlantic telecommunications
cable—running between the shores of Newfoundland and Scotland—were
disrupted for almost three hours due to the excessive geomagnetically-induced
currents that were imposed. Telegraphic messages were garbled, and words
politely spoken at one end of the line were heard at the other as squeaks and
whistles: like sounds from a flock of starlings.
Geomagnetically-induced currents caused by the great solar flares of early
August, 1972—and by unseen CMEs which at that time had yet to be
discovered—succeeded in disabling an AT&T telecommunications cable that
ran from Chicago to the west coast. One of the effects was to cut off all longdistance telephone traffic between Chicago and Nebraska.
Since 1990, four out of five transoceanic telephone calls are carried in cables
beneath the ocean. During the record-breaking magnetic storm of March 14,
1989, the first-laid transatlantic voice cable running along the ocean floor was
rendered almost inoperable when large electric currents were induced in it by
the storm-induced difference in electrical potential between the cable’s terminal
stations in New Jersey and England. Nor has the switch to wider-bandwidth
204

optical fiber cabling made much of difference in this regard, since the bundles
of glass fibers are bound with conducting wire. These too, pick up and transmit
unwanted electrical currents at times of severe magnetic storms.

Damage to Pipelines

Geomagnetically-induced currents can also accelerate corrosion in metal

pipelines, such as those used to carry oil or natural gas over distances of hundreds
to thousands of miles. The intrusion of magnetically-induced currents can also
interfere with the technical systems that are employed in pipelines to combat
corrosion.
Particularly susceptible to induced pipeline corrosion are any diversions or
irregularities: including places of departure from straight-line runs—such as
bends and branch points—and joints where different metals meet.

Impacts of Geomagnetic Storms on Geological
Surveys and Explorations

T

he onset of a geomagnetic storm, although playing out a thousand miles
and more above our heads, is immediately registered as an abrupt change in the
magnetic field at the surface of the Earth. There it is readily apparent as erratic
behavior in compass needles, and readily captured for later study by continuallyrunning magnetometers at magnetic observatories around the world.
We usually think of magnetic compasses as hand-held direction finders used by
Boy Scouts and other hikers, on collapsible tripods by road-side surveyors, or
freely supported in brass binnacles bolted to the deck on the bridges of ships at
sea. Magnetic storms can perturb all of these familiar uses and in addition—
often at great cost—the more sophisticated and automated applications in
which the Earth’s magnetic field is relied upon as a fixed directional reference.
One of these applications is in guiding the downward course of rotating bits
used in drilling oil wells. Here any perturbation in the reference direction
results in an immediate change in the direction of travel of the drill bit, which
can lead to costly errors and equipment damage. Thus to drillers and surveyors
a major magnetic storm is no less and probably more of a threat than the
sudden onset of severe weather.

205
Back to Table of Contents

This was the case for a number of North Sea oil companies when the severe
magnetic storms that followed the very large CMEs and solar flares of early
March, 1989 forced them to abandon all efforts to drill.
The same event displaced compass needles for a time by a whopping 10° from
the direction of magnetic north, with effects on navigators and surveyors
around the world.

206

207
Back to Table of Contents

EFFECTS OF THE SUN ON
WEATHER AND CLIMATE
A Brief History

I

t has long been known that the Sun provides almost all of the energy that
powers the weather machine, including the mighty forces that drive winds
and storms, push ocean currents, and cycle the water between the surface and
the air. What is not as well established—even today—is the extent to which
variations in the weather and climate arise from fluctuations, short or long, in
the energy the Sun delivers at our door.
This practical question, so often asked, has been around in one form or
another for a long, long time. For at least 200 years natural philosophers and
astronomers, then solar physicists and meteorologists, and now climatologists
and paleoclimatologists and oceanographers have tried to find the answers, in
the hope of achieving practical weather and climate prediction.
Concerns about the Sun’s constancy are common in early religions, and
probably as old as human thought. Almost as old, we may presume, are the
intuitive feelings that since the Sun is the obvious source of heat and light and
day and night, might it not also control the seemingly random vacillations of
weather and longer-lasting changes in climate?
Soon after Galileo and his co-discoverers first saw dark spots on the face of the
Sun, in 1609, it was apparent that the number of sunspots (and their sizes and
positions) changed from day to day. That these variations on the surface of the
Sun might possibly affect weather in Europe or elsewhere on the Earth must
have been to them an obvious deduction. And one that has never gone away.
The conjecture that sunspots might somehow affect the weather was common
enough that about a hundred years later, Jonathan Swift in 1726 wove this
common presumption into his tales of Gulliver’s Travels.
There he tells of the floating island of Laputa: a mythical land populated by
philosophers and astronomers who—equipped with telescopes better than
ours—were not only obsessed with the sky, but always troubled by what they
saw. Among their many apprehensions was a fear that the face of the Sun might
become so covered with dark spots that it would no longer provide sufficient
heat and light to the world. When the Laputians met an acquaintance early in
the day, he tells us, their first question was not the customary “How are you?”
but “How did the Sun look this morning?”
209
Back to Table of Contents

Jonathan Swift (1667-1745) and the title page of his book published under the pen name Lemuel
Gulliver in 1726. Throughout Swift’s life, astronomers and other learned people were well aware of an
unusual paucity of spots on the face of the Sun persisting for fully 70 years, from about 1645 until 1715:
a paradox which probably influenced Swift to include a fanciful but related episode in Gulliver’s Travels.

Real astronomers in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries who looked at the
real Sun in the real world were also intrigued by the possibility of a Sun-weather
connection. Quite apparent to any of them was the enormous practical benefit
to society—in an age when the prediction of weather was based almost entirely
on accumulated lore and seasonal expectations—were a clear connection to be
found linking the presence or absence of easily observed features on the disk of
the Sun to local or regional weather conditions.
				
Many claimed to have found it, including Sir William Herschel, the celebrated
astronomer and builder of large telescopes, whose paper published in 1801 in
the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society reported his own discovery
of a persistent relationship between the prevalence of sunspots and the price
of a bushel of wheat on the London market. Based on his own and earlier
observations of the Sun since about 1650, he found that during protracted
periods when sunspots were scarce the price of wheat was always higher.
Herschel reasoned that fewer spots on the Sun denoted abnormality and an
210

Sir William Herschel (1738–1822), widely considered
the leading astronomer of his day, was among those
who suspected a strong link between protracted periods
of unusually low or high solar activity, measured in the
numbers of sunspots seen, and the Earth’s weather. His
conclusions, published in 1801, preceded by almost half
a century the realization that sunspots followed a shortterm cycle of about 11 years.

accompanying deficiency in the amount of heat the Sun released, leading to
poorer growing conditions, diminished agricultural production, and through
the inexorable law of supply and demand, higher commodity prices.
When Herschel published his paper, the cyclic 11-year rise and fall in the
number of sunspots was not yet known, and wouldn’t be for nearly half a
century. The belated discovery of this strongly periodic feature in the annuallyaveraged numbers of spots on the visible surface of the Sun was announced, as
we have noted earlier, by Heinrich Schwabe in Germany in 1843.
In time Schwabe’s discovery proved to be a seminal revelation into the physical
nature of solar activity and variability. In the mid-nineteenth century, however,
the principal effect on scientists and many other people was a rush to find
statistical evidence of meaningful connections with other phenomena—and
particularly the weather, in the hope of finding keys to practical weather
prediction. Schwabe’s announcement triggered an avalanche of claims that
continued unabated for years, each purporting to have found meaningful
correlations between the sunspot cycle and a host of things meteorological,
hydrologic, oceanographic, physiological, behavioral, and economic.
Sir Norman Lockyer, the Victorian solar physicist who founded and for fifty
years edited the journal Nature was an early champion of these searches,
counseling in 1873 that “…in Meteorology, as in Astronomy, the thing to
hunt down is a cycle.” He had found one, himself, the previous year, in records
of the intensity of monsoon rains in Ceylon that were clearly linked, he said,
to the ups and downs of the 11-year sunspot cycle; adding, with characteristic
211
Back to Table of Contents

modesty, that based on his discovery, “…the riddle of the probable times of
occurrence of Indian Famines has now been read.”
Indeed, until relatively late in the 20th century almost the only tool available
for the investigation of possible influences of solar variability on weather
and climate was the statistical comparison of indices of solar activity with
contemporary meteorological records. And while some of these searches
proved valuable as probes and tests of a complex system, most of what was
found seemed soon to go away, and few of the correlations that were claimed
stood up to rigorous statistical tests. Without the buttress of a solid physical
explanation, none proved to be of any significant value in practical weather or
climate prediction. The required leap of faith between what was seen on the
Sun and what was felt at the bottom of an ocean of air on a small planet 93
million miles away was simply too great, in the absence of a fuller knowledge
of what happens in between.
Beginning in the 1870s, heroic efforts were made by the American astronomer
Samuel Pierpont Langley and others to put the question on a more solid basis
by attempting direct measurements of the Sun’s radiation from the top of
Mt. Whitney and Pike’s Peak and other high-altitude stations. Through the
persistence of Langley’s assistant and successor, Charles Greeley Abbot, attempts
to identify possible changes in solar irradiance from the surface of the Earth
were continued at different stations around the world through the first half of
the ensuing century: but to little avail, due to difficulties in absolute calibration
and larger uncertainties in allowing for the variable absorption and scattering
of solar radiation in the intervening atmosphere.
In spite of more than a century of dedicated effort, the very practical question
of whether and how solar variability affects the Earth’s weather and climate
would remain largely unanswered until relatively recently when needed facts
were at last obtained.

The Missing Pieces

Missing and badly needed in early attempts to find answers to the Sun-Climate

question were (1) a fuller understanding of the effects of sunspots and other
apparent changes on the energy released from the Sun; (2) a more complete
understanding of other forces that perturb the climate; (3) the availability of
analytical tools to test and evaluate proposed responses to solar fluctuations
in a system that was both complex and interactive; (4) a reliable record of
global climatic changes, both past and present; and perhaps most important;
(5) quantitative measurements of any changes in the amount of solar energy
the Earth receives.
212

While some facts were known about the surface of the Sun two hundred years
ago when Sir William Herschel proposed a causal connection between sunspots
and the price of wheat, next to nothing was known about what we now call
climate, as opposed to short-term weather. The same was true almost a century
later when Sir Norman Lockyer laid his shaky claim to having unlocked the
secrets of the Indian monsoon.
The fundamental questions were these: Through what limits does the energy
received from the Sun vary, from day to day or year to year? How much does the
climate vary at any place, or over the Earth as a whole? How does the climate
system work, and how important a player is the Sun?
Today we have most of the answers, due largely to our ability to observe the
Sun and global phenomena from the vantage point of space, and the modern
capability of creating and testing realistic models of the entire climate system
that incorporate variable inputs from the Sun. Major advances have also been
made in the last few decades about the interactive climate system and the
history of climate change, driven in large part by world concerns regarding
global warming and its likely economic, societal and environmental effects.

Metering the Energy the Earth Receives

M

any of the advances of the past few decades in understanding the effects
of the Sun on climate come from direct measurements from space of the
fluctuations in solar energy received at the top of the Earth’s atmosphere: truly,
where the rubber meets the road. These seminal measurements of total solar
irradiance—initiated in 1978 and continuing today—give needed substance to
modern investigations of the Sun and Climate, while providing answers to the
oldest of all solar questions: How constant is the Sun?
We now know that the total solar irradiance varies from minute-to-minute,
reflecting activity-driven changes on the face of the Sun; from day-to-day in
step with solar rotation and the evolution of solar active regions, with day-today amplitudes of up to about 0.3%; and more important in terms of climate,
from year-to-year with a peak-to-peak amplitude of about 0.1%, in phase with
Schwabe’s 11-year sunspot cycle. In years when the Sun is more active, and
more spots are seen, more radiative energy is delivered to the Earth—just as
Herschel had surmised, 200 years ago.
The impact of variations of this amplitude on surface temperature depends
on the persistence of an increase or decrease, and the sensitivity of the climate
system to solar forcing. In theory, and were nothing else at work, a sustained
213
Back to Table of Contents

Total Solar Irradiance
1368

Wm-2

1367
1366
1365
1364
100-day Smooth
Daily Data

1363
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2000

2005

Irradiance Variability Components

4

Facular
Brightening

2

Wm-2

0
-2
Sunspot
Darkening

-4
-6

1980

1985

1990

1995

Upper: Changes in the total radiation received from the Sun at the top of the Earth’s atmosphere
through three 11-year solar cycles, starting in 1978 when continuous radiometric measurements of this
fundamental parameter were begun. Maxima and minima are in phase with coincident changes in solar
activity, with maximum radiation received in years of maximum solar activity.
Lower: Day-to-day changes in total radiation expected from daily measurements of the areas of bright
faculae (which increase the radiation received) and sunspots (which act in the opposite direction)
observed on the surface of the Sun. Although sunspots are more easily seen, faculae and bright regions
exert a greater effect on the annual average of solar radiation received at the Earth, as is apparent in the
upper figure.

214

increase of 0.1% in total solar irradiance can be expected to warm the surface
temperature of the Earth by about 0.1°F.
And indeed, changes of this amount have since been found in averaged regional
and global weather records, extending back for fifty years or more, in both
the temperature of the air and in surface and subsurface temperatures of the
oceans. These could easily be attributed to changes in total solar irradiance,
since the amplitudes and phase of the temperature anomalies are consistent
with the observed 11-year variation in the radiative output of the Sun.
But the remarkably close agreement with the ocean data, in particular, is in
some ways enigmatic, for the thermal inertia of the oceans should more heavily
damp the climate system’s response to “rapid” fluctuations in solar energy.
It takes about three years for the upper, mixed layer of the ocean to fully respond
to heat added at the surface. This means that unlike the air, its temperature at
any time tells not so much about today as about the past, and more precisely of
what it remembers of conditions during the last several years. Yet the Sun’s 11year cyclic forcing persists for only a few years in one direction before reversing
itself: three years to rise from minimum to maximum, two or three years there,
then a slower fall of five or six to the next minimum.
The effect of the oceans’ three-year memory in responding to short-duration
changes of about the same length should significantly reduce its theoretical
sensitivity to imposed solar forcing. Yet the 11-year variation found in ocean
temperature data is not less but more than what is expected.
What seems likely is that other climatic processes are indeed at work, including
possible feedbacks that tend to amplify the response of the Earth’s climate system
to subtle solar forcing. In addition, 11-year variations larger in magnitude than
in the total solar irradiance are found in the Sun’s spectral irradiance and in
its output of high-energy particles. Either or both of these could well prove
responsible for amplifying the apparent response of the atmosphere to 11-year
solar forcing.
				
Other important questions still remain. Is the Sun so massive and
imperturbable that the more superficial 11-year modulation of total and
spectral irradiance and solar particles are the only significant variation in
the energy it releases? Might there be other, longer-term changes? Our only
continuous record of solar energy received at the Earth—from 1978 to the
present day—covers but the blink of an eye in the life of the Sun. Nor has it
215
Back to Table of Contents

yet allowed us to detect the effects of known fluctuations in solar activity that
persist for decades and longer.
Best known among these longer-term changes are the recurrent 50 to 100-year
episodes of severely suppressed activity, like the Maunder Minimum of 16451715, that are prominent features in both historic records of sunspots and
in the far longer proxy records of solar activity obtained from dated ice cores
and tree-rings. Nor did the space-borne measurements begin early enough to
catch the systematic rise in the overall level of solar activity which was the Sun’s
dominant characteristic through the first half of the 20th century.
Recent Prolonged Episodes of Low and
High Solar Activity
EPISODE

DURATION

Spörer Minimum

1540 - 1450

Maunder Minimum

1645 - 1715

Dalton Minimum

1790 - 1830

Modern Minimum

1875 - 1915

Modern Maximum

1940 - Present

There could be other, deeper-lying causes of change in solar irradiance—
periodic or aperiodic, related or unrelated to solar activity—that operate more
slowly and on longer scales of time. And because of the thermal inertia of
both the land and the oceans, we should expect the climate system to be more
responsive to slower and more persistent forcing than to daily, annual, or
11-year fluctuations.
One reason for suspecting longer-term changes of larger-amplitude in solar
radiation include an apparent correlation between the Spörer and Maunder
minima of solar activity in the 15th through the early 18th centuries and
particularly cold epochs of the contemporaneous Little Ice Age, and the close
correspondence between features in the paleoclimate record of the Holocene
epoch with what is known of the behavior of solar activity from proxy data
during the same periods of time. But these apparent associations are with
indices of solar activity and not necessarily solar irradiance. While irradiance
changes are arguably the most likely solar cause, they are but one of several
activity-related variations in the output of the star.
				
An auxiliary method for studying possible long term changes in the radiative
output of the Sun is by adding statistical evidence from dedicated, ongoing
observations of the spectra and brightness of Sun-like stars. Some early studies
216

seemed to indicate likely similarities. But these have not been substantiated
and as yet the radiometric findings from other stars are far from conclusive on
this matter.

Recovering the Past History of the Sun

W

e know now that sunspots inhibit the upward convective transport of
energy to the photosphere and diminish the emergent radiation in proportion
to their total projected area as seen from the Earth. Bright areas that surround
sunspots and the bright boundaries of the tops of convective solar granules act
in the opposite direction to increase the Sun’s total energy output. As a result of
this ongoing tug-of-war the amount of radiation the Sun emits and we receive
is continually driven up and down: at times increasing the energy we receive
and at others reducing it.
In the long run, when averaged over a year or so, the brighter elements prevail, as
is apparent in the observed rise (of about 0.1%) in measured total irradiance
in years of greater solar activity, and the ensuing fall as solar activity declines.
These clear associations linking easily-observed solar features to solar
irradiance—a parameter which is far more difficult to measure and monitor—
provide a kind of Rosetta Stone, or template, for translating earlier historical
observations and records of the numbers of spots seen on the Sun into histories
of associated changes in total or spectral irradiance.
				
Drawings and other accounts of the number of spots that were seen on the
Sun on any day are available through most of the long 400-year history of
telescopic solar observations. But the period in which these can most reliably
be employed to recover associated changes in solar irradiation does not begin
until the second half of the 19th century: on the heels of Heinrich Schwabe’s
discovery in Dessau.
It was then, in response to fast-growing interest in the possible terrestrial effects
of the sunspot cycle, that a daily photographic patrol of the white-light solar disk
was first begun: initially in 1858, at London’s Kew Observatory; not long after,
on the banks of the Thames at the Royal Greenwich Observatory; and in due
course at other stations in other countries around the world. A corresponding
set of continuous photographic images of the solar chromosphere is available
from at least 1905 onward. For the period of time between about 1880 until
1978, when direct measurements began, the changes in total solar irradiance
217
Back to Table of Contents

that are related to the 11-year solar cycle can be reconstructed with some
confidence. What they cannot tell, however, is whether there were other, slower
and possibly larger changes as well.
Nevertheless, estimates of solar radiation derived in this way from historical
sunspot records resemble quite closely the long-term trends and excursions in
the mean global surface temperature of the Earth for the same period. Moreover,
when postulated changes of greater amplitude than those measured in the past
quarter century of record are included—keyed to known, long-term changes
in the overall level of solar activity—the fit with the surface temperature record
of the last 100 years is remarkably good.

Termperature
(°F)

Based on the presumption that these long-term changes in the overall level of
solar activity tell of changes of larger amplitude in solar irradiance, about half of
the documented rise in the surface temperature of the Earth in the period from
about 1900 to 1940 might possibly be attributed to the Sun. In the remaining
years of the century just ended, the fraction of the total change in mean surface
temperature that can be attributed with certainty to solar variability drops to
less than 5% of the concurrent steeper rise in temperature, with the remainder
widely attributed to the direct effect of ever-increasing levels of greenhouse
gases. But it must be emphasized that the larger-amplitude, slower changes in
solar irradiance on which these conclusions are drawn are largely speculation.
The more conservative assessment which dismisses the possibility of as-yet
undetected irradiance changes of longer term, is that the effect of solar changes
are no motre than a ripple on the back of a gigantic swell driven by increasing
greenhouse gases.
1.2
0.8
0.4
-0.0
-0.4

Anthropogenic Trend
Solar Irradiance
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

A comparison of the effects of two forcing factors on the mean surface temperature of the Earth through
the period from 1978 and 2007: in blue, from recorded measurements of the total radiation received
from the Sun; and in red, the calculated long-term trend due to the recorded increase in atmospheric
greenhouse gases. The human-induced (anthropogenic) trend far exceeds the amplitude of the expected
effect of the Sun on the Earth’s surface temperature, washing out the periodic lower-amplitude effect of
recorded changes in solar forcing.

218

How much farther back in time can we hope to improve our knowledge of past
activity-related changes in solar irradiance?
Drawings of the disk of the Sun, and written records of sunspots and bright
faculae are indeed available for the last several hundred years. And in almost all
of these the Sun’s 11-year cycle, including changes in its amplitude, are readily
found. But the reliability of the pre-1850 records begins to fray when there are
fewer than 365 sampled dates in any year, since the face of the Sun can vary a
great deal from one day to the next, in both active and quiet years.
By this criterion the quality of the historical record of annually-averaged sunspot
activity (and by association, of reconstructed changes in solar irradiance)
degrades from excellent in the period since 1850, to fair from that date to about
1818, and successively poorer before that time.
Nonetheless, the patched-together accounts of the number of sunspots seen
on the Sun—beginning in the early 17th century and continuing to this day-comprise what is probably one of the longest continuous diaries of anything
in science. And this long record can now be read, both as proof of an ongoing
11-year solar cycle and as evidence of slower variations of longer term in the
behavior of the Sun.
The less direct but far longer proxy records of past solar behavior obtained
from the carbon and beryllium isotopes 14C and 10Be, described later in this
section, also speak eloquently and emphatically of recurrent long-term changes
in solar activity. In the most recent five hundred years of these proxy data the
same long-term variations appear that are found in early historical records of
sunspots and aurorae.

Effects of Solar Spectral Radiation

As we have seen, the bulk of the radiation from the Sun, in the visible and

near-infrared regions of the spectrum, comes from the 10,000° F surface of
the photosphere, while solar radiation in both shorter or longer wavelengths
originates in higher and much hotter levels in the solar atmosphere: in the
chromosphere, transition zone and corona.
In these magnetically-dominated levels in the Sun’s atmosphere, solar activity
plays a greater role, and for this reason the radiation they emit varies through
a much wider range than does the Sun’s light and heat in the visible and
near-infrared.
219
Back to Table of Contents

Ozone Change (%)
Solar Variation (%)

5
4
3
2
1
0
5
4
3
2
1
0

Ozone at
43 km Altitude

Ultraviolet
Solar Irradiance
0

27

Days

54

81

108

Measured changes in solar ultraviolet radiation received at the top of the atmosphere (in red) over a
period of about five months, showing modulation due to the effect of the Sun’s 27-day rotation. In
blue are contemporaneous measurements of percentage change in the amount of ozone in the high
stratosphere where ozone is created by the action of this form of solar radiation on molecular ozone.

Of particular interest are the regions of the more variable parts of the ultraviolet
spectrum that control the chemical composition and photochemistry of the
middle atmosphere, including the stratospheric ozone layer.
The connection between 11-year cyclic variations in solar ultraviolet radiation
and the amount of ozone in the stratosphere is well established, although a
quantitative relationship, based upon measurements taken during the last
two solar cycles, was made more difficult by the chance occurrence of two
major volcanic eruptions—which can affect the transparency of the air and the
production of ozone—during the same period of time: El Chichón in Mexico
in 1982 and Mt. Pinatubo in the Philippines in 1991.
Stratospheric ozone can also affect the dynamics of the atmosphere, including
the circulation in the troposphere. The chain of physical and chemical processes
that link solar ultraviolet radiation to stratospheric ozone and then to radiative
or dynamical coupling between the stratosphere and troposphere is one of the
two most likely mechanisms—on the basis of available energy—to explain
apparent connections between solar activity and climate. The other is direct
solar heating through changes in the total solar irradiance. The effects of either
one could be either damped or amplified by possible feedback mechanisms
within the internal climate system.
220

Past changes in the Sun’s ultraviolet spectral irradiance can also be reconstructed
from photographic images of the solar disk made in the visible spectrum,
taken in the restricted light of the center of strong absorption lines in the solar
spectrum that originate at the same higher level in the solar atmosphere as does
much of the ultraviolet radiation.
Measurements of the radiation the Earth receives in different parts of the solar
spectrum—from the far ultraviolet through the near infrared—have been
recorded continuously since 2003 when NASA’s SORCE (Solar Radiation and
Climate Experiment) spacecraft was launched. Measurements from SORCE,
which also carries a total radiation monitor, make it possible for the first time
to examine the relative contributions of different spectral components to the
total radiation received: a powerful aid in determining their possible roles as
agents of weather and climate change.

Sensitivity of Climate to Solar Fluctuations

T

hrough how many degrees should we expect the mean surface temperature
of the Earth to rise (or fall) were the Sun’s total output of energy to increase
(or decrease) by a given amount, say 1%? A quantitative answer to this simple
but important question defines what is called the climate sensitivity, which
is among the fundamental parameters required in sophisticated numerical
models of the climate system.
It is possible to calculate, based on fundamental physical principles, what the
temperature response should be. The answer is that in the absence of any internal
amplification or feedbacks, each increase of 1% in the total solar radiation
received at the Earth should raise the mean surface temperature of the planet
by about 1° F—or as noted earlier, 0.1° F for each 0.1% increase.
But it is more to the point to determine the sensitivity of climate to solar
forcing empirically: that is, based on real measurements under real conditions
in the real atmosphere. And this also has been done.
				
One of the most recent and extensive determinations of climate sensitivity
was based on the analysis of globally-complete meteorological data sets for the
twenty-five year period for which direct measurements of total solar irradiance
were then available. When the known effects of the other dominant forcing
mechanisms are subtracted—including El Niño/La Niña, volcanic eruptions,
and the documented increases in greenhouse gases and atmospheric aerosols—a
clear 11-year modulation remains. Moreover, it is in phase—as we should
221
Back to Table of Contents

expect—with the solar activity cycle, in the sense that years when the planet is
hotter correspond to years when the Sun is more active.
If we assume that variations in solar irradiance are the cause, the amplitude of
the apparently solar-driven modulation in surface temperature is about two
times greater, as noted earlier, than simple theory would predict: or about 0.2°
F for the observed 0.1% change in total solar irradiance.
The difference of a factor of two is in agreement with a similar study of ocean
temperature data sets, and also with what is implied in another even more
extensive study of a remarkably robust correspondence between reconstructed
temperatures for the last 11,000 years and proxy records of changes in solar
activity during the same period. A likely explanation of what seems to be a
consistent difference is a feedback in the climate-system that amplifies the
direct impacts of rather small changes in solar irradiance.

1367

0.8

21

22

Temperature (F)

0.4

23

1366
1365

Solar Irradiance (Wm2)

1368

0
-0.4
-0.8
-1.2
1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Time (years)

A comparison of (1) measurements of the total solar radiation received at the Earth during solar cycles 21,
22, and 23 (in red); an (2), in blue, spacecraft measurements of the northern hemisphere temperature of
the lower troposphere in the same period. The effects of volcanoes, El Niño/La Niña events, and a fitted
linear trend have been removed from the temperature record.

A similar investigation, based on global surface temperatures covering the
entire 20th century came to a similar conclusion. In common with other
modeled studies of the same kind, it was found that combining solar and
anthropogenic (human-driven) forcing in approximately equal amounts
provided a good fit to the global documented global warming of the Earth in
the first half of the century. However, to fit the continued and steeper rise in
mean surface temperature in the period following 1940 required additional
222

non-solar heating, which was attributed to the rapid increase in greenhouse
gases and atmospheric aerosols at this time. In this more recent period the ratio
of anthropogenic to solar forcing needed to explain the observed temperature
rise was about 4:1. Which infers that increased solar warming, acting alone,
might explain only about 20% of the rise.
An apparent amplification of the effects of changes in solar irradiance was also
found in climate models when more CO2 and other greenhouse gases were
introduced into the atmosphere.
These and other results suggest that the effect of solar irradiance variability on
climate depends to some degree on pre-existing conditions and what else is at
work at the time, and where, in the coupled (land-ocean-atmosphere) climate
system. If so, it may help explain the will o’ the wisp nature of so many of
the here-today, gone-tomorrow correlations that have been claimed through
the years linking weather and climate parameters with the sunspot cycle—
including, among others, Norman Lockyer’s purported discovery of an 11-year
monsoon cycle in British India in 1872 .

11-Year Solar Forcing

Beginning in the high stratosphere, some thirty miles above the surface of the

Earth, any changes in the atmosphere are directly driven by the Sun, which
exacts pronounced responses to any variations in solar spectral irradiance and
incoming atomic particles. Examples can be found in the dramatic solardriven changes in the number of electrons and ions in the ionosphere, and
in the instantaneous temperature responses of the thermosphere. Variations
that are clearly related to the 11-year solar cycle are also apparent in the lower
stratosphere, in the long series of readings taken there by sounding balloons.
All of these more rarefied regions of the Earth’s atmosphere are more directly
exposed and in many ways more vulnerable to solar disturbances and fluctuations.
But the dense troposphere—the realm of all weather and climate—is only
weakly linked to the more vacuous middle and upper atmosphere, due to these
great differences in density.
Apparent 11-year effects have been noted through the years in local and
regional weather records, but it is only recently that the marks of the Sun have
been unequivocally found in hemispheric or globally-averaged tropospheric
data sets.
One of these, covering forty years of Northern Hemisphere temperature
measurements from balloon sondes at heights of about two to eight miles above
223
Back to Table of Contents

the surface, reveals a clear 11-year signal, in phase with the solar activity cycle,
with higher temperatures, as expected, in years of maximum solar activity.
Another, covering the entire globe, found a similar 11-year temperature
response that varied, in both sign and amplitude, as a function of both latitude
and height above the surface. The nature of the differences suggests that the
solar signal observed is imposed from the stratosphere, as a result of dynamical
motions in the atmosphere.
Another—cited earlier—based on global measurements of the troposphere
in low and mid latitudes from 1958 through 2001 found that not only the
temperature, but all major meteorological observables in low and mid-latitudes
were strongly correlated with the phase of the 11-year solar cycle, when
signals due to other known sources of climate forcing were removed from the
data. The latter included known El Niño Southern Oscillation (or ENSO)
effects, volcanic eruptions, changes in atmospheric aerosols, and a linear trend
attributed to global greenhouse gases.

Solar Forcing of the Oceans

T

he oceans are a major element of the global climate machine, affecting yearto-year and longer changes in climate through ocean-atmosphere interactions
and internal modes of climate variability such as the Pacific Ocean ENSO and
the North Atlantic Oscillation, or NAO: a similar phenomenon involving a
quasi-regular see-saw in sea-level air pressure between large-scale regions, in
this case in the North Atlantic Ocean.
The oceans also influence climate by storing heat in ocean basins, and by
temperature-driven changes in the thermohaline circulation of the deep oceans
that are driven by systematic differences in the salinity of ocean water.
Variations in solar irradiance are a likely forcing factor in each of these, as
has been shown in recent studies of different ocean characteristics. In one of
them, 11-year cyclic variations were found in surface and subsurface ocean
temperatures, which were consistent—in both phase and amplitude—with
measured 11-year variations in solar irradiance. Another, which we describe
later, found a striking correlation throughout the last 11,000 years between
ocean temperatures and recurrent eras of prolonged suppression of solar activity,
like the Maunder Minimum.
Clear marks of 11-year solar forcing were also found in ocean temperature
measurements covering forty-two years of surface and sub-surface temperature
sampling in the Atlantic, Indian, Pacific, and global-averaged Oceans, spanning
conditions from latitude 20° to 60° N. These reveal systematic cyclic changes
224

in ocean temperatures, like those found in the atmosphere, that are in phase
with the 11-year solar activity cycle, and consistent with the variations found
in total solar irradiance. The 11-year temperature response was evident from
the ocean surface to a depth of about 500 feet, which is about the maximum
distance to which sunlight penetrates. (The transparency of the photic zone
of the upper ocean—which in the clearest ocean water extends to a depth of
about 650 feet—is greatest in the blue part of the visible spectrum, and in
more turbid seashore waters in the green and green-yellow. To most of the
ultraviolet and infrared, the seas are almost opaque.)
Although many questions remain, these documented changes in long-term
records suggest that natural modes of the global climate system are locked in
phase to the 11-year solar activity cycle.
That subtle changes in solar irradiation might serve as a phase-locking
device for year-to-year changes in climate is in agreement with our present
understanding of the glacial-interglacial cycles, tens of thousands of years long,
that characterize the climate of the Pleistocene epoch of the last million years
or so. In the latter case, relatively small changes in the distribution of insolation
(radiant solar energy) over the globe, arising from gradual changes in the orbit
of the Earth and the inclination of its axis of rotation—today a tilt of 23½°—
are thought to have served as the pace-maker for the coming and going of the
major Ice Ages.

Hidden Diaries of the Ancient Sun

Radiocarbon (

C) is an unstable isotope of carbon that has long been
employed in archaeology for establishing the date of production of samples of
cellulose or bone or other carbon-bearing matter. It and the beryllium isotope
of atomic weight ten (10Be) are the best known and most abundant of the
so-called cosmogenic nuclides which when naturally sequestered in wood or
compacted snow can also serve as indirect, or proxy indicators of past changes
in solar activity. The recovery and analysis of both of these—14C from the wood
in annual growth-rings of the oldest-living trees, and 10Be in layered ice drawn
from deep polar cores—have confirmed the existence of prolonged episodes
of major depression in the overall level of solar activity, such as the Maunder
Minimum of 1645-1715. In so doing they have greatly extended the span of
retrievable solar history.
14

Cosmogenic nuclides are created in the rarefied air of the middle atmosphere
when energetic cosmic rays impinge on neutral atoms of air. Each carbon-14
atom is the product of a direct hit by an incoming neutron—itself the newlyborn product of a preceding cosmic ray collision higher in the atmosphere—on
an atom of neutral nitrogen (14N): the most abundant component of air.
225
Back to Table of Contents

200

10
14

Be

3.5

C

100
4.0
50

4.5

0
1600

1700

Maunder Minimum

1800
Year
Dalton Minimum

1900

10

Sunspot Group Number

150

Be and 14C (104 atoms/g)

3.0

Sunspot Number

2000
Modern Maximum

Average number of sunspot groups seen each year (in blue) compared with the rates of production of
radiocarbon(14C, dashed green) and beryllium-10 (10Be, dashed red) in the Earth’s atmosphere for the
period since the introduction of the telescope on 1610. These cosmogenic isotopes are produced by
incoming cosmic rays whose numbers are modulated by solar activity, and hence serve as indirect proxies
of solar activity. Their past concentrations are obtained for carbon through laboratory analyses of dated
tree-rings and for beryllium from cores of layered Arctic and Antarctic ice. The data used for carbon-14
measurements come to an end at about 1900, by which time the carbon introduced into the atmosphere
by the ever-increasing burning of fossil fuels erases, in effect, the more subtle solar signature in the treering record.

In the process a proton is jarred loose from the impacted atom’s nucleus, leaving
behind an unstable isotope of carbon of atomic weight 14: the most abundant
cosmogenic nuclide. 10Be, the second most abundant, is produced by a similar
process when incoming cosmic ray protons bombard and break apart neutral
atoms of either oxygen or nitrogen.
The number of cosmic ray particles that reach our planet to do this work is
modulated by changes in both the strength of the Earth’s magnetic field, and
by changes in solar activity, both of which act to deflect cosmic rays that pass
through the heliosphere.
The strongest of these are changes on times scales of thousands of years in the
strength of the Earth’s magnetic field. The higher frequency (10 to 100 yr)
effects of solar changes are imposed on top of these like noise on a sinusoidal
wave form. Among these higher frequency effects are the slower but greater
amplitude changes like the Maunder Minimum in the overall level of solar
activity, persisting for decades to a hundred years or so. Present as well are the
even higher frequency effects of the Sun’s eleven-year cycle of activity.
226

More cosmic particles reach us when the Earth’s magnetic field is weaker, as
it was seven thousand years ago, and fewer as it grows stronger, as it did until
about two thousand years ago when it began again to gradually weaken.
More cosmic particles also reach the Earth when the Sun is less active; and fewer
when it is more active. Thus the rates of production of 14C and other cosmic
nuclides in our atmosphere are strongly anti-correlated with solar activity, as
confirmed by more than half a century of direct observation of the flux of
cosmic rays using neutron monitors at mountain-top stations.

The Fate of Carbon-14

Soon after they are created, atoms of

C combine with neighboring atoms
of oxygen to form gaseous carbon dioxide, most of which, in time, diffuses
downward into the lower atmosphere. When it reaches ground level, some is
ingested through pores in the leaves of trees.
14

There, through photosynthesis, CO2 separates into its component atoms of
carbon and oxygen. The freed carbon, still of weight 14, is then metabolized
in the plant, this time combining with hydrogen and oxygen to form cellulose:
the carbohydrate that is a fundamental constituent of all plant fiber, including
the wood of trees.
And so it is that a carbon atom of weight 14, born of mixed parents high in
the sky, is—after years of traveling around the world—at last sequestered in the
thin sheath of living cells that form a ring of springtime growth in the stem of
a growing tree.
				
Carbon 14 is inherently unstable in that it radio-actively decays with time into
ordinary carbon of weight 12.
After 5730 years—the expected half-life of the isotope—about 50% of the 14C
remains, and after 30,000 years, only 10%. When a third of a million years
has gone by, 99% of the original 14C has been converted to ordinary 12C. In
coal and oil and natural gas—which were created during the late carboniferous
period, about 300 million years ago—all of the radiocarbon then present in
the small aquatic plants and animals that gave us these now troublesome fuels
is gone.
Thus, like sand in an hourglass, the amount of radiocarbon present in any form
of carbon-based life—living or dead—tells us of its age: or more specifically, the
227
Back to Table of Contents

time that has gone by since the instant each atom of radiocarbon was created,
high in the sky. To a close approximation this tells as well of the time that has
elapsed since the plant-eating animal whose bones we find was last alive and
grazing; or when the tree from which the sample of wood was cut, however
long ago, was yet in leaf.
				
The ratio of 14C to 12C in a dated tree-ring also reflects the average rate of
production of 14C in the atmosphere, which is in turn a measure of the flux of
high-energy cosmic rays at the Earth, and from this, the level of solar activity
at that time.
Through this chain, precision analyses of 14C/12C ratios in annual rings of the
long-lived bristlecone pine have provided a continuous, proxy record of longterm changes in the level of solar activity through the last 11,000 years—since
the end of the last Ice Age—extending the length of the historical, written
record of sunspots by a factor of about thirty. An 11-year modulation, though
severely attenuated by the amount of time it takes for the newly-created
carbon-14 atom to make it into the leaves of trees, can be detected, albeit with
difficulty, throughout. A much more obvious feature in the long radiocarbon
record are repeated Maunder Minimum-like depressions in the overall level of
solar activity, each persisting for thirty to about 100 years.

Beryllium-10 in Ice Cores

An independent verification of these reconstructions of solar history is available

through the analysis of another cosmogenic nuclide, beryllium-10 (10Be),
sequestered in polar ice and deep-ocean cores. Since the rates of deposition of
10
Be and of 14C result from very different processes, we can at first assume that
major features common to both of them are due to their rate of creation, and
hence traceable to the Sun.

Cosmogenic 10Be is like 14C in that it accumulates in the lower stratosphere for
a while before entering the troposphere. But unlike radiocarbon, beryllium-10
finds its way down to the Earth’s surface more directly and expeditiously,
through either precipitation or dry deposition, and is not biogeochemically
recycled en route as carbon-14 often is. Although we never see or feel it, 10Be
is deposited on our roofs and yards and the tops of our cars, wherever we are,
each time it rains or snows.
				
228

Thus, had he but known, Robert Louis Stevenson in A Child’s Garden of Verses
could instead have written
The rain is raining all around,
It falls on field and tree.
Big drops of H2SO4
And chunks of 10Be.
The beryllium that reaches the surface in polar regions is entrapped in annual
layers of fallen snow that are in time compressed and preserved as annual layers
of hardened ice, initially separated by lines of superficial thawing and refreezing.
Since 10Be is rapidly washed out of the air by precipitation, its abundance in
the atmosphere varies considerably in both space and time. Because of this,
the amount sequestered in any ice core layer reflects not only the solar-driven
production rate of the cosmogenic nuclide but also atmospheric circulation
patterns and precipitation rates that brought it to that individual spot on the
ground in the snows of yesteryear.
Because of this and unlike 14C—which in the form of CO2 is uniformly mixed
throughout the global atmosphere—the amount of 10Be that accumulates on
the surface of the Earth varies considerably from place to place: very much
a function of the amount of rain or snow that has fallen there, and hence of
local and regional weather. Variations found in layers of snow and ice at any
site can be corrected for local precipitation effects, but corrections for nonlocal meteorological variations in the delivery of 10Be to the ice caps is far
more difficult.
Nevertheless, sequestered in a much older repository, and with a half-life of 1.5
million years (compared to 5730 years for 14C) 10Be in ice offers the potential
of extending the reach of recorded solar history in the deepest, Greenland ice
cores more than 200,000 years into the past, and potentially, in the deepest
Antarctic cores, to as much as 400,000 years, through a number of glacialinterglacial cycles: in all, a span of time that tody is the best documented and
most studied period of the past climate of the Earth.
Since the 10Be record is capable of finer temporal resolution than 14C,
what may be more valuable is the prospect of high resolution year-by-year
information on changes in solar activity through the last several thousand
years, derived from analyses of ice nearer the surface, where annual layering
is more clearly preserved.
As one drills deeper and deeper into the ice, what were once clearly-defined
annual layers of compressed snow and firn—separated by annual lines of partial
229
Back to Table of Contents

thawing and refreezing—gradually lose these valued earmarks: their identities
squeezed out of them by the accumulating load of glacial snow and ice that lay
above, in some places more than a mile deep.
Still, what these ice-core or tree-ring proxies tell us of the ancient Sun is not
a direct account of past changes in solar irradiation—which climatologists
would most like to know—but of changes in solar magnetic activity, which is
one step removed.

Marks of the Sun on North Atlantic Climate
During the Last 11,000 Years

An extensive paleo-oceanographic study—based on the recovery of data that
tell of climatic changes during the present post-glacial or Holocene epoch—has
yielded what may be the most compelling evidence for a connection between
longer-term changes in climate and the changing moods of the Sun. Found was
not one but an unbroken series of responses of regional climate to episodes of
suppressed solar activity like the Maunder Minimum, each lasting from 50 to
150 years.

The paleoclimatic data, which cover the full 11,000 year span of the present
interglacial epoch, were derived from records of the concentration of identifiable
mineral tracers in layered sediments on the sea floor of the northern North
Atlantic Ocean. The timing and duration of periods of suppressed solar activity
came from a different source: from analyses of the ratio of 14C to 12C in dated
growth rings of the long-lived bristlecone pine that cover the same period of
time, and from concurrent measurements of 10Be in polar ice cores.
The minerals used as ocean tracers come from the soil in high latitude regions,
which, through erosion, is carried out to sea in drift ice. When southerlydrifting ice reaches waters warm enough to melt it, the tracers are released and
sink to the bottom of the ocean. There they are gradually covered over with
other sedimentary material, that in time build up a layered history of what fell
to the bottom of the ocean at that place, and when.
Sea-cores drilled from ships at sea into the mud of the ocean bottom can
sample this imbedded information. Each core is in effect a time capsule that
holds a continuous record of the material that has sunk to the sea-floor at that
location. Analyzing many cores in this way—taken from different locations in
the North Atlantic Ocean—allows the investigator to draw a meaningful map
of the southern limit of drifting sea ice at any time in the past.

230

0.2
C

14

4
0

0.0

-4
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

-0.2

Smoothed 14C Production Rate
(atoms/cm2/sec)

Ocean Stacked (%)

Marine

Calendar Age (kyrs)
0.8
Be

10

4
0.0

0

-4
2

4

6

8

10

12

Smoothed 10Be Flux
(105 atoms/cm2/yr)

Ocean Stacked (%)

Marine

-0.8

Calendar Age (kyrs)
Comparison of proxy records of solar activity from tree-rings (upper figure, in green, for carbon-14) and
ice cores (lower, in red, for beryllium-10) with temperature in the North Atlantic ocean (black curve,
upper and lower, from deep-sea cores) for about the last 11,000 yrs (the Holocene epoch). Evident
is a remarkable agreement between long-term excursions in climate, lasting hundreds of years, and
contemporaneous conditions on the Sun. Periods of suppressed solar activity (peaks in the red and green
curves) like the Maunder Minimum correspond to times of cooler ocean temperatures, with higher
temperatures during long periods of greater solar activity which is of the same nature as the suggested
connection in more modern times between the Maunder Minimum in solar activity (1645-1715) and
the coldest temperatures of the concurrent but longer-lasting Little Ice Age.

231
Back to Table of Contents

In years when the climate is systematically colder in the region, waters sufficiently
warm to melt floating ice are not encountered until the floe has drifted far to the
south. In warmer periods, the opposite is true, and the southern limit of drift ice
shifts back toward polar waters.
The study revealed that the sub-polar North Atlantic Ocean has experienced
nine distinctive expansions of cooler water in the past 11,000 years, occurring
aperiodically but roughly every 1000 to 2000 years, with a mean spacing of
about 1350 years.
Each of these regional cooling events coincides in time with strong, distinctive
minima in solar activity, derived from records of the production of 14C from
tree-ring records and of 10Be from deep-sea cores covering the same period of
time.
This remarkable North Atlantic finding—the patient and painstaking work of
a diverse group led by the late Gerard Bond—suggests that solar variability has
been a major climate driver throughout the present Holocene epoch.
But to produce so strong and consistent a response, the solar driving force—
whatever its origin—would need some assistance, if what we know of the
bounds of solar variations still applies to these longer time scales. One of these
might be an amplification of the impacts of slowly-varying changes in solar
irradiation through their impact on the oceans’ thermohaline circulation.

232

233
Back to Table of Contents

An envisioned astronaut on the surface of Mars, with actual images of the Moon, Earth, and Sun placed in the Martian sky, shown
here much larger than they would actually appear from that distance.

FORECASTING SPACE WEATHER
AT THE EARTH AND BEYOND
Space Weather

T

he terms “space weather” and “space climate” were coined not long
ago to describe current and time-averaged conditions in the Earth’s outer
environment, in the same way that “weather” and “climate” refer to current or
time-averaged conditions in the lower atmosphere. Space weather includes any
and all conditions and events on the Sun, in the solar wind, in near-Earth space
and in our upper atmosphere that can affect space-borne and ground-based
technological systems and through these, human life and endeavor.
As noted earlier, the economic impacts of severe space weather events—such as
the major electric power outages that can follow strong geomagnetic storms, or
the disabling effects of solar eruptions on costly spacecraft—can easily reach the
level of direct and indirect losses now associated with the most severe weather
phenomena. Even moderate space weather events can affect national security,
and in many ways. Extreme space weather events can very seriously also affect
human life and health on extended lunar or planetary missions of exploration.
				
Terrestrial weather has long been of interest and concern to everyone on Earth.
But in the modern, interconnected high-tech world of today, space weather is
fast becoming equally important and down-to-earth. Today it can affect anyone
who has a television set, a radio, or a computer, or who makes use of GPS in
any way; all who travel on jet aircraft flights that cross high-latitude regions in
either hemisphere; nearly every city, large or small, that is linked to an electric
power grid; every ship afloat; every spacecraft that is sent into the sky; and any
nation whose security rests in part or all on radio communications, radar, or
space-borne equipment.
In predicting day-to-day weather the volume of space in which measurements
are taken and predictive models are run is limited to the troposphere: a thin
veneer of air extending no more than about seven miles above the surface of
the Earth.
In contrast, the vast domain of space weather and space climate starts in the
upper atmosphere—about fifty miles above our heads, and reaches all the way
235
Back to Table of Contents

to the Sun itself: nearly 100 million miles away. Within this vast region of
interest are the ionosphere, thermosphere, magnetosphere and radiation belts;
the immense volume of interplanetary space through which high-energy solar
and cosmic particles pass to reach the Earth; the Moon and the inner planets,
and the fiery furnace of the Sun itself.

Predictions

W

e have little if any control over the weather, and none at all over space
weather events. But we can minimize the societal impacts of variations in either
of them through reliable predictions of what is expected—or not expected—at
any time.
Forecasts of the next day’s weather at any place customarily include high and
low air temperatures, precipitation, cloud cover, expected winds, and other
meteorological parameters derived from computerized models of atmospheric
circulation at different heights in the troposphere. The data needed to supply
these models come largely from in situ measurements and observations
obtained from a shared, world-wide network of weather stations; from balloon
sondes; and since 1975—when the first Observational Environmental Satellite
(GOES-1) was put into orbit—from direct, large-scale pictures of cloud cover
and storm tracks seen from a height of 22,200 miles.
Information regarding space weather is obtained in much the same way, as are
corresponding three-day or longer forecasts of things to come.
Among the need-to-know users of reliable space weather information are
commercial airlines; electric power companies; almost every segment of the
telecommunications industry including cell-phone and GPS providers; law
enforcement; homeland security; banking and other commercial interests;
those who go down to the sea in ships; all branches of the military; NASA and
other national or international space agencies, particularly at times of human
or robotic exploration; and commercial space and space tourism ventures.
Meeting the specific needs of these and other users often calls for tailored
“predictions” of various kinds, all of them based in large part on computerized
models that reproduce the behavior of parts or all of the Sun-Earth system.
The most common prediction is a “forecast”: a prediction issued before an event
such as flare or geomagnetic storm takes place. An example is the arrival of a
fast moving CME, or a severe magnetic storm. But there are useful predictions
of other kinds.
236

A “nowcast,” as in meteorology, is a statement of current conditions at this
time. Actual “predictions” may be in the form of an “alert,” which might state,
for example, that A large fast-moving CME appears at this time to be headed
toward the Earth; a “watch” telling for example whether it is likely (or unlikely)
that the present very low or very high level of solar activity will persist through
the next two weeks; or a “warning” such as Major disruptions in the ionosphere
are expected during the next eight to ten days, in connection with expected CME
and flare activity.
				
In the past, warnings of unfavorable weather and impending storms on land
or sea were often issued using color-coded lights or flags, not unlike the redorange-yellow advisories that were a few years ago tried to signal different levels
of perceived homeland security risk.
In Birmingham, Alabama for example, a continuously-burning electric beacon
was for many years employed to alert residents of potentially hazardous driving
conditions. The warning light—installed where all could see it, atop an iron
statue of Vulcan, 55 ft. tall and set on a high pedestal at the summit of Red
Mountain—burned green for “all clear” or red when a fatal traffic accident had
occurred.
Simple warning systems of a similar nature employing displays of colored
flags and lanterns were and are still used in marinas, harbors and many coastal
points to advise mariners or recreational sailors of expected hurricanes and
other severe storm conditions.
Today and around the world, warnings of severe weather—at sea, on land,
or in space—are broadcast or disseminated electronically and instantly to
anyone concerned; and in more detail, which is required to serve the specific
and often tailored needs of the many different users of this information. This
is particularly true in space weather, where needless to say, a simple colorcoded alert system—perhaps red to indicate that solar or geomagnetic storms
are expected, green that they are not, and orange and yellow for different degrees
of ambiguity—would not be of much use in this case, either.

237
Back to Table of Contents

USEFUL SPACE WEATHER PREDICTION
THE SUN

• Probability, magnitude and expected duration of solar flares
• Probability, size, speed and direction of CMEs
• Probability and nature of solar energetic particle (SEP) events
• 27-day or longer forecasts of solar conditions
INTERPLANETARY AND NEAR-EARTH ENVIRONMENT

• Intensity of solar EUV irradiation
• Particle radiation environment in near-Earth space
• Solar wind plasma parameters: density, velocity and magnetic field
orientation
• Trajectories, predicted arrival time and likely impact of CMEs
• Cosmic ray flux level
MAGNETOSPHERE AND RADIATION BELTS

• Expected conditions in the magnetosphere and radiation belts
• Strengths of electric current systems in the magnetosphere
• Expected geomagnetic storms including onset, intensity, and duration
• Ground induced currents
UPPER AND LOWER ATMOSPHERE

• Conditions in the thermosphere and ionosphere
• Onset, intensity and expected recovery of ionospheric storms
• High energy particle fluxes at jet aircraft altitudes

Sources of Needed Data

In some instances the information needed for an accurate space weather forecast

are secured—as in meteorology—by direct, in situ sampling. Examples are data
regarding the composition, energy and magnetic field orientation of the solar
wind plasma, sampled when possible by spacecraft that are at the time immersed
in that medium. Another is the continuous record of characteristics of the Earth’s
magnetic field recorded by magnetometers through a global network of groundlevel stations. A third is in situ measurements of the ambient flux of high-energy
particles sensed by the radiation counters routinely carried for determining the
dosage of ionizing radiation received on some European airlines.
But most of the data that provide current information about the Sun, cosmic
rays, the magnetosphere and plasmasphere, and the thermosphere and
ionosphere are arrived at indirectly, or observed from afar by remote sensing.
238

				
Information regarding the Sun comes chiefly from telescopic observations
made either on the ground or by spacecraft above the atmosphere. Images of
the corona, needed for the prediction and monitoring of CMEs come mostly
from space-borne x-ray telescopes and visible-light coronagraphs. The total and
spectral irradiance received from the Sun—from the x-ray and EUV to the
infrared—is also continuously monitored from afar by space-borne radiometers
designed to secure these critical data from above the interfering atmosphere.
The flux of solar EUV radiation obtained from solar-pointed spacecraft is a
particularly vital source of information because of its role in configuring the
layered ionosphere, and heating the thermosphere. Estimates of the flux of
solar EUV irradiation—and its variation from minute to minute or year to
year—are also obtained, though less directly, from ground-based solar radio
telescopes that monitor the intensity and variability of coronal radio emission.
Ground-based measurements of the radiation of the unresolved disk of the Sun
in two narrow spectral lines—that of ionized calcium in the near-ultraviolet
and helium in the near-infrared—provide other proxies for the whole-disk
solar EUV radiation.
When solar radio antennas are pointed at the Sun and their receivers tuned
to 2.80 gigahertz (10.7 cm wavelength) in the ultra-high frequency band,
they receive solar radio emission that comes from the same level in the Sun’s
outer atmosphere that produces energetic solar EUV radiation. Because of
this, records of solar radio emission at this wavelength and of whole-disk EUV
radiation closely track each other.
Like measurements from space of the total solar irradiance in the EUV, 10.7
cm radio emission from the Sun records the averaged radiation from the entire
visible disk, without spatially resolving individual bright or dark features: as
though the Sun were a star-like dot in the sky. Because of this built-in averaging,
measurements of 10.7 cm solar radio emission have since the 1950s provided
an alternate spatially-averaged index of solar activity that complements the
daily sunspot number.
Of these two, the 10.7 cm radio index is less subjective than the venerable
sunspot number, which was arbitrarily defined by Rudolph Wolf in Zürich in
1849 as the number of discernible spots seen on the disk plus ten times the
number of sunspot groups, all multiplied by an estimated correction factor to
compensate for perceived differences in observers, telescopes, observing sites
and atmospheric conditions.
239
Back to Table of Contents

				
An indirect measure of the flux of galactic cosmic rays at the top of the Earth’s
atmosphere is provided by neutron monitors operated at high-altitude stations
around the world. The numbers of neutrons that penetrate to these lower levels
is at any time a proxy indicator of the incidence of primary cosmic rays higher
in the atmosphere, which through collisions with atoms and molecules of air
produce these most energetic secondary cosmic ray particles.
The density of electrons in different layers of the ionosphere—the determining
factor in forecasts of radio propagation conditions—is also recovered indirectly
by remote sensing, in this case employing radio waves transmitted upward
from the ground. As in conventional radar, the strength and timing of the
reflected signal can be read in terms of the local structure and electron density
in the layered atmosphere, fifty to several hundred miles overhead.

Available Warning Times

T

he extreme speeds at which energetic solar particles and radiation stream
outward from the Sun impose severe limits on the amount of time available,
once an event is observed there, to react to or mitigate its possible effects.
All electromagnetic radiation leaves the Sun at the same velocity—the speed
of light, about 186,000 miles per second—and reaches the Earth in eight
minutes. The speeds of atomic particles depend upon their own energy, at the
Sun and en route.
Slow-speed streams in the solar wind can take more than four days to make
the journey, while solar energetic protons (SEPs) can arrive in a matter of tens
of minutes or less. Less energetic particles from the Sun, and those carried
outward in CMEs, generally arrive at the orbit of the Earth in from one to
three days.
But the warning time available to us on Earth is always eight minutes less than
the time it takes particles or photons to get here.
This automatic deduction is a consequence of the fact that what we see when
we look at the Sun is not what is happening at this minute, but what happened
there eight minutes ago: the time it takes visible light to travel the 93 million
miles that separate us from the star. Were we on Mars, a look at the Sun would
show us what it was like there about 12 minutes before; and on Jupiter, almost
three quarters of an hour ago.
240

TRAVEL TIME from the Sun to the Earth
PARTICLES

SPEED IN MILES/
SEC

TIME TO REACH THE
EARTH

Particles in the slow solar wind

250

4½ days

Particles in a typical CME

250

4½ days

Particles in high-speed streams

470

2½ days

360 to 1100

1 to 3 days

Less energetic particles from
solar flares
Particles in the fastest CMEs
Energetic protons from solar flares

1200

30 minutes to several hours

25,000 to 100,000

15-60 minutes

186,000

8 minutes

ELECTROMAGNETIC
RADIATION
X-ray, EUV, UV, Visible, Infrared,
and Radio radiation

Thus the moment we first see the bright flash of a solar flare, the energetic EUV
and x-ray radiation it sends our way has already arrived—as though it got here
instantly; and the damaging high energy protons that can travel to the Earth in
but 15 minutes time are already more than halfway here, leaving us at most but
seven minutes’ warning time. For most other particles—including the fastest
plasma in CMEs, the obligatory eight-minute deduction is not as significant.
			
How much warning time is needed to mitigate possible deleterious effects at
the Earth?
An hour of advanced warning of a severe geomagnetic storm can be helpful
for electric power companies, for in that time they can change the way they
generate and distribute energy. An hour or less may be enough to allow air
controllers to reduce the altitude of flights passing through polar regions or
to redirect the flight paths of those en route. A half hour to an hour may be
enough for astronauts engaged in extravehicular activity to scurry back inside,
or for those on the surface of the Moon or Mars to seek shelter—if there is
any—from an anticipated burst of extremely energetic particles from the Sun.
				
There are also ways of gaining more warning time.
One is to delay the mission itself if unusual solar activity is expected, or to
postpone scheduled space walks en route to or on the surface of the Moon or
Mars. Another is to direct crews to hunker down in parts of the command
module, or if space allows, in the lunar lander that may in places offer
marginal protection.
241
Back to Table of Contents

The most beneficial and challenging way to increase the warning time is through
reliable predictions of when and where likely solar eruptive events will occur.
For CMEs, the prediction must reliably foretell whether the expanding blob of
plasma will cross the Earth’s path. If so, its size and speed and the orientation
of the magnetic field it carries are also needed, as is its projected time of arrival
and the probability of intense geomagnetic storms.
Alerts and warnings must first of all be reliable, since in many applications
false alarms can lead to considerable unnecessary expense. Examples are electric
power companies who will reconfigure power distribution networks or put on
extra equipment in anticipation of a major geomagnetic storm; airlines who
will expend additional fuel and delay or cancel flights; telecommunications
carriers who will shift frequencies and strategies. False alarms can also limit the
accomplishments and ultimate success of costly space missions when tightlyscheduled activities are cancelled, or result in a depletion of orbital control fuel.
Assistance in increasing the accuracy and the warning time of forecasts is
now available thanks to the deployment of early-warning spacecraft that are
stationed, like sentinels, nearer to the Sun than we. In these advanced positions
they can send back vital information, as from scouts sent ahead of an advancing
troop of the U.S. Cavalry.
Radioed early warnings sent back to us from distant sentinels can never outrun
the x-ray and EUV photons that race past them, traveling at the speed of
light toward the Earth. But they will get here well in advance of approaching
CMEs, fast streams in the solar wind, and most energetic particles coming
from flares.
The ACE spacecraft, launched in 1997 and still hard at work, was designed
to study the composition of plasma and energetic particles in the heliosphere
from a distant outpost nearly a million miles closer to the Sun than we, where
it serves as a watchman or sentinel of this kind.

Especial Needs for Manned Space Exploration

Streams of solar protons and heavier ions with particle energies in the range

of 106 to 109 electron volts can pose severe hazards for manned space missions
that venture beyond the natural protection of the Earth’s atmosphere and
magnetosphere. Continuous exposure to galactic cosmic rays, with even higher
energies is equally if not more hazardous to manned space flight. Exposure to
sufficient doses of the ionizing radiation of highly-energetic atomic particles
can damage cells in living tissue and organs that provoke cellular mutations
242

and incipient cancer; induce nausea and the debilitating symptoms of radiation
sickness that were felt by victims of atomic bomb explosions sixty years ago;
and lead to slow or sudden death.
At the same time, each high-energy atomic particle that streams through our
bodies is not a deadly bullet. Nor is it likely that a single burst or stream of
them would be.
The critical factor—for astronauts, pilots, passengers, or patients in a dentist’s
chair—is, as noted earlier, the accumulated dosage that one receives: the product
of the intensity of the ionizing radiation (determined by the speed, mass, and
number of ionizing particles) and the amount of time one is exposed to it.
				
Every manned spacecraft that ventures beyond the Earth’s atmosphere and
magnetosphere will find itself caught in the crossfire of energetic particles
coming from as many as four different sources.
The first and least hazardous is the ubiquitous solar wind in which spacecraft
are immersed as soon as they leave the protective shields that surround the
Earth: the ever present flow of low energy (1 – 10 keV) particles borne outward
from the Sun in a turbulent mix of steady breezes and sudden gusts. Immensely
more energetic cosmic rays are also ever present, arriving from every direction
in the sky and able to pierce almost anything.
A spaceship in deep space will at times also find itself directly in the path of
fast-moving CMEs: but these particles, too, are limited to the low energy range
of a few KeV and are not ordinarily a direct threat to space travel.
The least frequent but probably most hazardous to life and health are the solar
energetic protons (SEPs) and heavier ions that are accelerated outward by
CMEs and major solar flares, and in the shock waves that form—like the bow
wave of a ship—some distance ahead of the fast-moving plasma. These travel
toward us at almost unimaginable velocities which can approach the speed of
light. When coupled with their appreciable mass, this makes SEPs, with cosmic
rays, the principal threats to be avoided in manned space flight. And they can
rain down on our planet, on the Moon and Mars and in near-Earth space for
hours on end.
The challenge in deep-space exploration of the Moon and Mars is to provide
shielding sufficient to block or deter any of these ultra-high-energy particles
from reaching parts of the spacecraft where astronauts live, work or seek shelter.
243
Back to Table of Contents

It has been estimated that astronauts on extended trips like those envisioned
for Mars or for manned colonies on the Moon would each year receive from
galactic cosmic rays fully 16 times the maximum authorized dose of ionizing
radiation prescribed for nuclear plant workers. Moreover, to be effectively
shielded from GCRs while on the surface of either body would require burying
a lunar or Martian base below hundreds of tons of lunar or Martian soil.

Sunset at the close of a Martian day seen from the Mars Pathfinder on the planet’s surface. With a much
thinner atmosphere—evident here in the absence of sunset colors—almost no UV-absorbing oxygen,
and no magnetic field, visitors on the planet will be exposed to the hazards of solar x-ray and extremeultraviolet radiation, bursts of energetic solar particles, and the round-the-clock barrage of extremely
energetic cosmic rays.

As noted earlier, a 100 MeV proton can easily pass through an inch and a half of
aluminum, and cosmic ray particles can be orders of magnitude more energetic
than that. It is therefore likely that the metal skin and frame of the command
service modules and lunar landers that were sent on Apollo missions to the
Moon in the 1960s and 1970s would have provided little if any protection
against these most energetic atomic particles.
Galactic cosmic rays, as noted above, pose difficult problems for extended
manned missions since they are more energetic and are present all of the time.
The greatest challenge is the accumulated dosage of GCRs encountered on
long space flights, such as the deep-space missions, two or three years long, that
have been envisioned for the manned exploration of Mars. On missions of this
duration, the accumulated dosage of galactic cosmic rays would almost surely
exceed the threat from solar flares and CMEs. Indeed, cosmic rays may indeed
be a show-stopper for manned missions to Mars unless practical ways are found
to provide effective shielding against them.

244

Principal Hazards of Human Space Flight on Missions
that Travel beyond the Earth’s Atmosphere and
Magnetosphere
ENERGY PER
PARTICLE IN
ELECTRON
VOLTS

MOST PROBABLE TIME
OF OCCURRENCE; AND
EXPECTED EXPOSURE

PRINCIPAL
CONCERN

solar
energetic
particles
from major
solar flares
and
CME-driven
shock waves

106 - 109

During periods of high solar
activity, which are more likely
during or following maximum
years of the eleven yr cycle
--------------.
30 minutes to several days
for those associated with
observed CMEs

Persistent or repeated
exposure to unusually
intense events

galactic
cosmic rays

109 - 1020

Continuous

Accumulated dosage on
space missions lasting
longer than a few days
or weeks

SOURCE

Current Capabilities

T

he ultimate goal in studying space weather is an ability to foretell events and
conditions on the Sun and in near-Earth space that will produce potentially
harmful societal effects, and to do this adequately far in advance and with
sufficient accuracy to allow preventive or mitigating actions to be taken. In this
sense it is much like the goal of predicting earthquakes or tsunamis, or more
appropriately, the daily tasks of today’s National Weather Service, but for a
region that is 1014 times larger: namely, the volume of space that includes the
Sun, the Earth, the Moon and ultimately, Mars.
Our ability to attempt forecasts of this kind rests on the foundation of a long
history of accomplishments in research, discovery and investigation; on the
daily operation of solar and magnetic observatories around the world; on the
launch and operation of a growing number of spacecraft designed to meet this
need; on the development and continual improvement of analytical models
of parts or all of the Sun-Earth system; and on a national and international
infrastructure which has helped organize and sustain these global efforts for
the common good.
In our own country, the interagency framework which can help meet this
challenge has been provided since 1995 by the National Space Weather Program
(NSWP) which was organized to ensure collaborative efforts among seven
federal agencies that had individually addressed or were significantly affected
by space weather. Included are NASA; the National Science Foundation; the
245
Back to Table of Contents

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA, through the
Department of Commerce); the Department of Defense; and the Departments
of Energy, Transportation, and the Interior.

Operational Facilities

T

here are two civilian operational organizations that in this country process
and interpret space weather information to provide forecasts and real-time
warnings of space weather disturbances for specific users of this information.
The first and more specifically relevant to the needs of human space flight is
the Space Radiation Analysis Group (SRAG) operated at the Johnson Space
Center in Houston, Texas by NASA’s Radiation Health Program: an arm of
the Agency that has long tracked and studied the potentially harmful impacts
of high-energy, ionizing radiation from the Sun or the Cosmos on human
space travelers.
The second addresses impacts of space weather on the broader community of
those affected by it, from aircraft operations to communications and electric
power systems and geophysical exploration. It is known as the Space Weather
Prediction Center, or SWPC, a world solar and space weather monitoring
center operated in Boulder, Colorado through the joint efforts of NOAA and
the U.S. Air Force.
Each of these two dedicated centers keeps a twenty-four hours a day, seven
days a week watch on the Sun and near-Earth space. Each is staffed by trained
professionals and function much like Combat Information Centers on ships of
war, or the Situation Rooms that somewhere deep within the White House or
the Pentagon track national security happenings as they unfold.
				
Is more than one operational space weather patrol necessary? Are two
policemen or two firemen better than one? The SRAG and SWPC serve two
quite different communities and focus on two separate and urgent needs, and
through essential overlap provide enhanced scrutiny and back-up. Each keeps a
round-the-clock watch on the face of the Sun, its surface magnetic fields and its
outer atmosphere, tracks the birth and development of individual solar active
regions, and monitors conditions in near-Earth space. Working cooperatively,
they keep a close eye on solar magnetic regions that are likely to erupt in flares
and produce CMEs, and track their progress with these eventualities in mind.
In the same way they follow the evolution of active prominences and watch for
246

ominous changes in the inner and outer corona, identify CMEs as they first
appear, project their outward progress and for those headed in our direction,
forecast their time of arrival and expected impacts.
In order to do this, the SRAG and SWPC receive continuous flows of information
from solar and magnetic observatories around the world, following the path of
a Sun that never sets, as well as data from dedicated spacecraft that continually
watch the inner corona in the light of its short-wavelength emission, and with
space-borne white-light coronagraphs, the changing form of the outer corona.
				
The SRAG at the Johnson Space Center is responsible for ensuring that the
dosage of ionizing radiation received by astronauts from solar eruptions and
galactic cosmic rays remains below established safety limits. To do this the
activity provides
• continual monitoring of space weather conditions, including information
from instruments on board operational satellites such as GOES, SOHO and
ACE;
• comprehensive advance and real-time information on radiological exposure
during specific manned missions;
• monitoring equipment carried on board to measure the actual radiation
environment inside and outside the spacecraft
• extra-vehicular activity (EVA) planning, support and monitoring;
• advance information and updates to mission planners, flight controllers,
flight directors and flight surgeons on expected solar behavior and radiation
levels;
• contingency responses to likely space weather events during specific
missions;
• pre-flight modeling of expected crew exposure, particularly during EVAs;
• evaluation of radiological safety from exposure to radiation-producing
equipment on the spacecraft itself;
• tracking of the daily and cumulative doses of radiation received by each
member of the spacecraft crew; and
• an interface with support groups within and outside the agency, including
the SWPC.
An appreciation of the level of effort and expertise devoted to these
challenges at the SRAG can be gained very quickly by logging on to its web site,
http://srag-nt.jsc.nasa.gov/. Included there, as well, is a trove of summarized
information on space shuttle missions currently planned or in progress and the
current status of the International Space Station.
247
Back to Table of Contents

				
Additional streams of incoming information allow the SWPC in Boulder to
track conditions in the approaching solar wind and the flow of particles at the
top of the Earth’s atmosphere that foretell the occurrence of magnetic storms and
auroral displays. Other data tell of the changing state of the magnetosphere and
the electric currents that flow within it, and of conditions in the thermosphere
and layered ionosphere.
Based on an assimilation and considered interpretation of all these data, and
aided by analytical models, a day-by-day forecast is prepared for space weather
conditions in the next three days.
Among the many users of these current reports of vital information are the
Federal Aviation Agency; the Departments of Defense and Homeland Security;
NASA, providing a supplemental flow of information throughout the full
duration of crewed space missions; the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission
and electric power industry in anticipation of possible power interruptions;
those involved in geological surveys and exploration; and the many others—
including particularly the operators of satellite communications and
navigation systems and the broadcast industry—who depend upon reliable
and uninterrupted telecommunications. All of the general projections and
the background information on which they are based are made immediately
available to the whole wide world on the internet (see, for example,
http://www.swpc.noaa.gov/)
				
Nearly every impending solar-driven storm—and all of the largest and most
threatening—can be foreseen with the advantages of 24-hour observations
of the Sun, the considerable help of early warnings from the distant ACE
spacecraft and improved understanding of the chain of events that connect
solar disturbances to the Earth.
One of the most taxing challenges facing the SWPC and SRAG is an accurate
and precise prediction of the date and time of arrival at the Earth, the Moon or
Mars, of the particles and fields that are driven outward from these very distant
events. A decade ago specific predictions for the Earth were correct about a
third of the time. Today the batting average is about .500, which is about the
same as was the case with the prediction of severe meteorological storms—then
a more mature field of study—in the 1960s.

248

Advance alerts and warnings issued from the SWPC were instrumental in
mitigating the possible impacts from what became known as the “Great Bastille
Day flare” of July 14, 2000: a long-lasting release of magnetic energy from the
Sun that was followed by three fast-traveling shock waves and the immediate
discharge of a monstrous CME that was directed, like a huge cannon ball,
precisely at the Earth. When it hit, the momentum of the CME pushed the
Sun-facing side of the magnetosphere so close to the Earth that spacecraft in
geosynchronous orbits, normally shielded by the magnetosphere, were left, fully
exposed, outside it. The SWPC in Boulder proved its worth again with highly
useful predictions of what came to be called “the Halloween Day” storms in
late October, 2003: another awesome display of solar eruptions and terrestrial
effects that were released by the Sun two years after the peak of the most recent
solar cycle.
Even the early warning ACE spacecraft was so showered with particles in this
event that it ceased to operate for a time. By the next day the largest magnetic
storm in eleven years had perturbed the upper atmosphere all around the Earth,
setting off low-latitude displays of the aurora borealis and australis.
Probably the most threatening impacts on the surface of the Earth were the
effects of unusually strong induced electric currents on power distribution
systems that damaged power transformers at twelve power plants in North
America. But in this case alerts that were issued by the SWPC in advance of
the geomagnetic storm allowed time for power companies—including nuclear
power plants—to prepare for the event. As a result there were neither blackouts
nor major financial impacts.

The Heliophysics System Observatory

Some twenty-six operational spacecraft circling both the Earth and the Sun—

or on further voyages of discovery, far from home—now explore, patrol and
monitor the complex, coupled Sun-Earth system. They are there to identify,
understand and ultimately predict the major changes on the Sun and in nearEarth space that affect space weather and human endeavor. To do this they are
designed and operated to complement each other, and to work together as an
ongoing System Observatory in near-Earth space.
NASA develops this bold system as an evolving entity, responding to practical
needs, new findings and the necessity to replace ailing or failed elements. Long
lead-times are involved in the initial concept and design, operational plan,
funding, construction, testing and launch of any new spacecraft. Thus, in
order to meet anticipated needs of the System Observatory in this and future
249
Back to Table of Contents

decades there are now more than forty other spacecraft at various stages of
development—from initial concept to fully funded and under construction—
working their way through this long pipeline.
Ships in this potential fleet, like those now in operation, differ in many
ways, including (1) their specific mission, and the instruments they carry to
accomplish it; (2) their size, weight, scope, anticipated lifetime and expected
time of delivery; (3) the nature and complexity of their envisioned operation,
including their orbit (or orbits where multiple spacecraft are involved) and
the proposed scheme of in-flight control and data management; and (4) their
method of launch, and often-shared sources of support, within this country or
abroad. These parameters all bear on the cost of the proposed mission.
				
Spacecraft of the System Observatory that are currently in operation—or
expected to join the fleet by the end of year 2009—are briefly described in
the accompanying table, where they are listed in order of launch date and
separated by color code into three broad areas of principal emphasis within
the Sun-Earth system.

250

The evolving Heliophysics System Observatory consisting of current and some future spacecraft that
study the Sun and the Sun-Earth environment. Currently operating spacecraft missions as of July 2009
appear in white, future scheduled launches in yellow.

251
Back to Table of Contents

SPACECRAFT THAT NOW STUDY AND MONITOR
THE SUN-EARTH SYSTEM
Principal emphasis:
Sun and heliosphere
Solar wind particles and fields
Magnetosphere and upper atmosphere

SPACECRAFT
VOYAGERS 1 and 2
NASA

DATE
LAUNCHED

ORBIT

MISSION

1977

Outward journey from
the Earth and the Sun

Exploration of the
outer boundary of the
heliosphere

1992

Highly elliptical orbit
that takes it from 30 to
about 200 RE

Study of the
dynamics of the
Earth’s magneto-tail

1994

94,000 miles from
the Earth at the L1
Lagrangian point

In situ study of the
solar wind in a region
closer to the Sun
than we

1995

94,000 miles from
the Earth at the L1
Lagrangian point

Observations
and study of the
solar interior, solar
irradiance, solar
magnetism and CMEs

1997

94,000 miles from
the Earth at the L1
Lagrangian point

In situ measurements
of the solar wind
before it reaches the
Earth

1998

Circular, Sunsynchronous orbit
around the Earth

Images of magnetic
structures in the
corona and transition
zone

2000

Four spacecraft in
elliptical polar orbits,
12,000 to 74,000 miles
above the surface

Investigation of
critical phenomena in
the magnetosphere

2001

390-mile equatorial
circular orbit around the
Earth

Study of the coupled
magnetosphere,
thermosphere and
ionosphere

2002

370-mile Sunsynchronous circular
orbit

Study of particle
acceleration and
energy release in
the solar corona and
flares

GEOTAIL
INSTITUTE OF SPACE AND
ASTRONAUTICAL SCIENCE
(ISAS) AND NASA

WIND
NASA

SOHO (Solar
and Heliospheric
Observatory)
NASA, ESA

ACE (Advanced
Composition Explorer)
NASA

TRACE (Transition
Region and Corona
Explorer)
NASA

CLUSTER
EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY
(ESA) AND NASA

TIMED (ThermosphereIonosphere-Mesosphere
Energetics and
Dynamics)
NASA

RHESSI (Reuven
Ramaty High Energy
Solar Spectroscopic
Imager)
NASA

252

SPACECRAFT THAT NOW STUDY AND MONITOR
THE SUN-EARTH SYSTEM (Continued)
Principal emphasis:
Sun and heliosphere
Solar wind particles and fields
Magnetosphere and upper atmosphere

SPACECRAFT
AIM (Aeronomy of Ice
in the Mesosphere)

DATE
LAUNCHED

ORBIT

MISSION

2007

375 mile Sunsynchronous orbit

Radiometry and images of
polar mesospheric clouds;
linkages between vertical
atmospheric regions

2008

Equatorial circular
orbit within the
ionosphere

Measurements of
irregularities in the
ionospheric plasma as
these pertain to radio
propagation

2006

370-mile Sunsynchronous circular
orbit

Detailed observations
and study of the evolution
of solar magnetic fields

2008

High altitude orbit that
reaches 150 thousand
miles above the Earth

IBEX images will reveal
global properties of the
interstellar boundaries
that separate our
heliosphere from the local
interstellar medium

2006

Two identical
spacecraft in orbit
about the Sun at 1
A.U.

3-dimensional
observations of the Sun
and CMEs

2007

5 identical spacecraft
in equatorial orbits
at distances of 10 to
30 RE

Particles and fields in the
tail of the magnetosphere
and their connections with
magnetic substorms and
aurorae

2008

Two spacecraft,
29,000 miles above
the Earth in highinclination orbits

Stereoscopic imaging
of the magnetosphere
to study connections
between processes in
different regions

NASA

CINDI (Coupled Ion
Neutral DYnamics
Investigation)
U.S. AIR FORCE AND NASA

HINODE (SOLAR-B)
AEROSPACE EXPLORATION
AGENCY OF JAPAN (JAXA)
AND NASA

IBEX (Interstellar
Boundary Explorer)

STEREO
nasa

THEMIS (The
History of Events
and Macroscale
Interactions during
Substorms)
NASA

TWINS (Two Wideangle Imaging Neutralatom Spectrometers)
NASA

SPACECRAFT THAT WILL SOON STUDY AND MONITOR
THE SUN-EARTH SYSTEM
SPACECRAFT
SDO (Solar Dynamics
Observatory)
NASA

LAUNCH
DATE

ORBIT

MISSION

Fall 2009

22,200 miles above
the Earth in an inclined
geosynchronous orbit

Solar observations to
clarify the sources of solar
variability that affect life
and society

253
Back to Table of Contents

254

REFLECTIONS
E

arly in Jules Verne’s prescient novel, From the Earth to the Moon, published
in 1873, the President of the Baltimore Gun Club presents in a formal address
to his colleagues his bold plan to fire a manned projectile to the Moon. “There
is no one among you,” he begins, “…who has not seen the Moon, or, at least, heard
speak of it.”
And so it is with the even more familiar Sun, on which we so completely
depend for the continuance of life on this planet.

Solar Misbehavior

T

hroughout human history almost all people have seen the Sun as wholly
benevolent and indeed the very emblem of dependability and constancy in
its daily pattern of rise and set. This longstanding article of faith was to some
degree questioned, however, when in 1609 it was first revealed to the western
world (what had long been known in the Orient) that when more closely
examined the brilliant face of the Sun was not the perfect, unblemished fire
most people had always assumed and indeed wanted it to be, but mottled with
a scattering of dark spots of many shapes and sizes that came and went from
time to time.
This disturbing realization was made in some ways more palatable when more
than 200 years later, in 1843—a delay consistent with Tennyson’s later reflection
that “Science moves but slowly, slowly; creeping on from point to point”—it at last
came to light that the total number of sunspots seen in any year was not random
but strongly periodic, driven by a cycle of about eleven years, which was not
unlike the wholly predictable movements of the planets or the comfortable
ticking of a clock.
This seemed to imply that if not constant, the Sun was at least regular. But even
this qualified consolation was taken away with the later realization that when
examined retrospectively over a longer span of time, the Sun behaved in a less
ordered and far less predictable way. During the seventy-year period between
about 1645 and 1715, for example, sunspot activity almost disappeared
altogether, as had happened not long before that between about 1450 and
1540, and in a dozen other instances sprinkled through the last 10,000 years.

255
Back to Table of Contents

In truth, all that we have ever learned about the Sun confirms that though we
might wish it otherwise, ours is a variable and moody star. We now know that
the total amount of heat and light released into space from its fiery surface
varies from day-to-day and year-to-year: rising when the Sun is more active and
falling when its surface is less spotted, through a total range of several tenths
of a percent. Solar radiation in the invisible and more energetic components of
the spectrum, which have the greatest effect on our upper atmosphere, follows
a like variation but through far greater excursions, changing in the ultraviolet
by several percent and in the far-ultraviolet and x-ray region by factors of 100
to 1000. We also know that isolated regions on the visible surface of the Sun
can for a few minutes erupt in an explosive flash of light accompanied by
the release into space of a burst of intense short-wave radiation. And that the
Sun pours into space and onto the Earth a nonstop flow of energetic atomic
particles in the form of a solar wind that blows in all directions throughout the
heliosphere; and often throws out whole pieces of itself in the form of colossal
ejections of coronal material, some of them headed our way.
		
				
Solar variability of any kind, gradual or abrupt, alters the amount and nature of
the solar energy that reaches the Earth. Moreover, to the best of our knowledge
the Sun has been acting this way and doing this to us throughout all of human
history, and long before that. Cro-Magnon people could have seen sunspots
with their naked eye had they the inclination to look at the dimmed red disk
of the Sun when it was near the horizon. Coronal mass ejections repeatedly
slammed against the Earth, disrupting its magnetic field and upper atmosphere,
throughout the long reigns of the pharaohs; at the time of Christ; and while
William Shakespeare was writing plays in London. And although these solar
tantrums went long unnoticed, we feel them today and in ever increasing ways.

What Has Changed?

Since prehistoric time what has changed in the age-old Sun-Earth relationship
is neither the Sun nor the Earth, but us, through our ever-increasing reliance
on technology.

Among the first to sense an immediate effect of sunspots and solar activity—in
this case, coronal mass emissions—were early telegraphers in the mid-nineteenth
century whose tapped-out dots and dashes were at times garbled in their passage
through copper wires that stretched from place to place between wooden poles.
The same problem of disruptive electric currents induced by solar-driven
magnetic storms was noted at about the same time in the nineteenth century
with the use of long communications cables laid down across the sea-floor.
256

Today, magnetically-induced currents in railroad tracks, in pipelines above and
below the surface, and though electrically-conducting soil are a real and growing
threat to electric power grids in heavily-populated regions where solar-induced
power failures can and have triggered massive blackouts in our interconnected
electric power distribution systems, resulting in losses of tens of millions of
dollars and more.
Solar-driven changes in the ionosphere, which were previously unrecognized,
became a dominant factor in the early 20th century and since, with the advent
and ever-wider application of radio waves, affecting early radio broadcasts and
other applications of this then emerging technology.
In the world of today solar storms can disturb or interrupt all forms of electronic
communication, including essential military, home security, and navigational
transmissions and signals sent to and from spacecraft hundreds to millions
of miles away. The lifetimes of spacecraft in near-Earth orbits are directly
affected by changes in the upper extent and density of the thermosphere,
which expands upward with greater solar short-wave radiation, increasing the
density of air and hence the amount the spacecraft is slowed by friction at a
given altitude. Spacecraft and space equipment in low-Earth orbits are also
affected by proximity or passage through the Earth’s radiation belts, which are
similarly modulated by solar activity. Spacecraft and/or the equipment they
carry can be damaged and even put out of operation by highly energetic solar
particles. Today commercial and military flight controllers redirect and change
the altitude of the flight paths of aircraft to minimize expected exposure to
heavy solar particle radiation.
There can be trouble, as well, right here in River City, for solar disturbances
can through their impacts on the upper atmosphere disturb many of our
common everyday activities, from telephone calls and satellite television to
GPS reception and the electronic transfer of information from ATMs, to credit
card transactions in stores and restaurants and gasoline pumps.
Acutely vulnerable to drastic changes in solar moods are those manned
spaceflights that carry astronauts beyond the protection provided by the Earth’s
atmosphere and magnetosphere, where they are directly exposed to intense and
even fatal particle radiation from major solar flares. This is particularly the case
when these brave venturers leave the partial protection of the spacecraft in the
course of EVAs, or while on the exposed surfaces of the Moon or Mars. Long
voyages to either of these destinations will in addition expose space travelers to
a continuous, cumulative dosage of even more energetic galactic cosmic rays,
which are also modulated by solar conditions and capable of passing through
the spacecraft as though it weren’t there.
257
Back to Table of Contents

To detect and monitor significant solar events a fleet of dedicated spacecraft
now circle the Earth at various altitudes, serving as a critical outpost of national
security. They are there to keep the half of the Sun that is visible to us under
continual surveillance, in white light and at wavelengths invisible on the
surface of the Earth; as in situ probes to monitor current conditions in nearEarth space; and to serve as distant scouts of what the Sun is sending our way.
As important are two dedicated operational centers, manned day and night,
where up-to-the minute information from space and the ground are compiled,
analyzed, and translated into forecasts and warnings which are made available
on the internet in real time to users around the world.

The Sun and Global Warming

T

he susceptibility of our weather and climate to solar forcing relates directly
to another, highly visible issue of current concern around the world. How large
a role has the Sun played in the well-documented global warming of the last
50 years, and to what degree could solar changes alter what is expected from an
anticipated doubling of greenhouse gases?
Variations in the amount of solar energy received at the top of the atmosphere can
through various paths alter meteorological conditions in the lower atmosphere,
including the surface temperature of the planet. The degree to which these
changes affect land and sea temperatures depends on their magnitude, their
persistence, and the relative effect of competing climate drivers.
The thermal inertia of the atmosphere and oceans dampens the effect of short
term forcing of almost any kind. And on the time scale of days or weeks or
months, the impacts of known solar-driven changes are far outweighed by
the combined effect of among others, changes in atmospheric circulation
and cloudiness; the introduction of volcanic dust and other particulates; and
lingering shifts in the interconnected atmosphere-ocean system such as the El
Niño effect. On time scales of decades or longer, when the up-and-down effects
of these other short-term climate drivers are removed in the averaging process,
persistent changes of even a small amount in solar forcing can be recognized.
A consistent response to the 11-year solar cycle is found in surface temperature
records for both the land and the ocean when these are averaged over large
areas and for longer periods of time.
The magnitude of the Sun’s impact on global surface temperature was unknown
and probably unknowable before it became possible to make highly-precise
measurements of the incident solar radiation from above the Earth’s atmosphere.
What has come from the now 30 years of these measurements is that the total
solar radiation varies through limits of about 0.1%, which corresponds to a
cyclic change in surface temperature of about 0.1° F.
258

Possible longer-term, larger-amplitude changes in the Sun’s output of energy
have been invoked to explain decade-to-century-long trends of warmer or
cooler temperatures in climate records of the past—such as the temporal
correspondence of the Maunder Minimum in solar activity with the Little Ice
Age. Gradual changes in the level of solar activity persisting for 50 to 100
years are indeed readily apparent in both the 400-year record of sunspots
and in the much longer tree-ring record of the production of radiocarbon.
But the available 30-year sample of measurements of total solar radiation is
insufficiently long to allow any meaningful check on whether known longerterm changes in solar activity have been accompanied by concurrent long-term
changes in solar radiation. Or whether the amplitude of possible longer term
changes in solar radiation might exceed the limits of what characterizes the 11year modulation.
Nor can a feeling that there might possibly be longer-term, larger solar
impacts compete with hard measurements covering almost half a century of
an ever-steeper increase in the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere,
or mounting evidence that the timing and nature of terrestrial responses, as in
Alaska, for example, fit so well what theory predicts for greenhouse warming as
opposed to direct solar heating.
As for solar irradiation, the only established fact is that changes that exceed a
few tenths of a percent have yet to be found in the limited 30 years of reliable
measurements from space. The impact of changes of so small a magnitude on
the mean global temperature of the Earth—which have now been observed—
are not in the same league with the far larger effects expected from the wellestablished increase in atmospheric greenhouse gases.
Thus solar forcing of surface temperature is for now relegated to a secondary,
second-order effect in terms of its impact on present trends in surface
temperature. Any claim that the accelerated global heating of the past 60 years
can be attributed to a changing Sun—thus conveniently absolving ourselves of
any guilt in the matter—is clearly wishful thinking.
				
Much of what is now known in each of the two practical issues just addressed—
our increasing susceptibility to solar changes and space weather in the modern
world, and the degree to which the Sun has contributed to global warming—
has come to light in but the last few decades.
It is fair to say that progress made toward societal application and reliable
prediction in the past 30 years exceeds in both cases all that we had accomplished
toward this end in the last 300.
259
Back to Table of Contents

It is also true that the principal contributor to these most recent breakthroughs
has been our new-found ability to observe and monitor the Sun, solar irradiation,
CMEs, the solar wind, the magnetosphere and the upper atmosphere from the
vantage point of space. Coupled with the foresight to plan and the dedication
to put in place and keep in place, one by one, the spacecraft and space-borne
instruments specifically dedicated to that essential and continuing task.

260

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This book owes much to six scientists in different disciplines who helped
me immeasurably by critically reviewing the manuscript at different stages of
its production: Mark Giampapa, Joe Giacalone, Jack Gosling, Janet Kozyra,
Terry Onsager and Chris St. Cyr, although any errors which remain in the final
printed version are solely mine.
I am as much indebted to those in the Heliophysics Division of the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration who envisioned a need for a popularlevel description of the entire interconnected and ever-changing Sun-Earth
System, and granted me the opportunity to write one: Dick Fisher and Lika
Guhathakurta. I am obliged as well to Steele Hill for help in identifying images;
and especially to Jennifer Rumburg, who worked closely with me on the initial
conceptual identity of the book, its content, and with artistry and creativity, on
all aspects of layout and production.
I am also grateful to the National Solar Observatory in Tucson and particularly
to Priscilla Piano of the NSO administrative staff.
Most of all I thank my wife and my best friend, Barbara, for invaluable advice
and counsel, daily encouragement and support, and patience without end.

John A. Eddy

261
Back to Table of Contents

262

GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL
TERMS
A
absorption line

a dark line in the spectrum of sunlight produced by the absorption of light of
a specific wavelength by an identifiable chemical element, such as hydrogen or
iron

active prominences

a broad class of solar prominences of a dynamic nature, including eruptive
prominences, radially-structured (as opposed to helical) prominences called
sprays, and loop-shaped prominences, all of which are generally associated
with flares

active region

a complex area of concentrated magnetic field on the surface of the Sun where
sunspots, faculae, plages (bright regions in the chromosphere) and filaments
occur together
		

adaptive optics

optical elements in a telescope that are designed to automatically compensate
for the effects of atmospheric turbulence and other disturbances

aerosol

a fine, solid or liquid particle suspended in air, such as a dust mote

alpha particle

the nucleus of a helium atom, made up of two protons and two neutrons

anomalous cosmic ray; ACR

a lower-energy cosmic ray created within the outer heliosphere when neutral
atoms from the interstellar medium are ionized by solar short-wave radiation

anthropogenic

of human origin

astronomical unit (A.U.)

the average distance from the Earth to the Sun, about 93 million miles
Technical or semi-technical words introduced in the text are printed in blue generally where they first
appear in the text. They are then defined in alphabetical order in the Glossary.
263
Back to Table of Contents

atom

the smallest unit of a chemical element (such as helium or carbon) that exhibits
the properties characteristic of that element

atomic weight

the sum of the number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus of an atom

aurora

diffuse, glowing light emitted from atoms and molecules in the Earth’s upper
atmosphere when incoming high energy particles from the Sun or the Earth’s
magnetosphere collide with them

aurora australis

aurorae that appear in the Earth’s southern hemisphere

aurora borealis

aurorae that appear in the Earth’s northern hemisphere

auroral oval

a belt of latitude, several hundred miles wide and centered on the north or
south magnetic pole, in which most aurorae occur

auroral substorms

particle-induced disturbances in the magnetosphere which are linked to the
brightest and most dynamic aurorae

B
biosphere

that part of the Earth’s surface, atmosphere, and oceans where life can exist

bow shock

the shock wave formed in a plasma stream when it comes upon a barrier such
as the Earth’s magnetosphere, which deflects, slows and heats the incoming
plasma. So-named because of its similarity to the curved “bow wave” which
forms in the water ahead of the bow of a moving ship

bulk speed; bulk motion

the average speed of individual particles within a streaming cloud of plasma,
such as a solar wind stream

264

C
carbon cycle

the ongoing exchange of carbon among living things, the atmosphere, the
oceans and the Earth’s surface

Cêrenkov radiation

electromagnetic radiation emitted by an atomic particle traveling through a
medium at a speed that exceeds the speed of light in that medium

chromosphere

a highly-structured layer in the Sun’s atmosphere that lies between the cooler
photosphere and the much hotter corona

chromospheric network

the pattern of bright interconnected lines in the solar chromosphere that
delineate the strong magnetic fields that exist at the boundaries of the closelypacked supergranulation cells

climate sensitivity

the change in the Earth’s mean surface temperature expected in response to
a 1% change in the total solar radiation received at the top of the Earth’s
atmosphere

closed field line

a magnetic line of force that connects regions of opposite magnetic polarity,
as for example, in magnetically-active areas on the Sun, or between the two
magnetic poles of the Earth

CME

see coronal mass ejection

convection

the upward transport of energy carried by the rising motion of hotter material,
as in the atmosphere of the Earth or the Sun, or in a kettle heated from below

convection cell

a closed cell of gas or liquid within which hotter material is borne upward
by convection, at some point releases its thermal energy, and then sinks back
downward to be reheated again

convection zone

the deep, internal layer just beneath the solar surface in which convection is the
dominant form of energy transport
265
Back to Table of Contents

corona; solar corona

the outermost atmosphere of the Sun, characterized by very low density and
extremely high temperature			

coronagraph

an especially-designed telescope employed in space or on the ground to allow
observation of the Sun’s corona at times other than during a total solar eclipse

coronal hole

a dark region in the inner corona where open magnetic field lines allow coronal
electrons to escape the Sun, resulting in a region of partially-depleted density
and hence reduced brightness

coronal mass ejections; CMEs

segments of the outer corona that have been expelled from the Sun into
interplanetary space in the form of expanding clouds of solar plasma, some as
large or larger than the Sun itself

cosmic rays

highly energetic atomic nuclei stripped of most or all of their electrons, that
pass at all times and from all directions through intergalactic, interstellar and
interplanetary space. The most energetic of these (called galactic cosmic rays)
presumably originate in dynamic cosmic phenomena within or beyond the
galaxy, such as supernova explosions

cosmic ray shower; cascade

the expanding sequence of secondary cosmic rays initiated by the collision of
an incoming cosmic ray with an atom or molecule of air. This initial impact
produces daughter particles that then collide, farther down in the atmosphere,
to create a continuing series (or cascade) of similar events

cosmogenic nuclide

an isotope such as radiocarbon (14C) which is formed in the middle atmosphere
of the Earth when an incoming cosmic ray collides with a neutral atom of air

cosmos

the universe, often taken to indicate all of space

Cretaceous period

a period of Earth history at the end of the Mesozoic era, extending from about
135 to 63 million years before the present

266

D
D, E, and F regions

horizontal strata in the middle and upper atmosphere of the Earth where free
electrons are sufficiently abundant to affect the passage of radio and other
electromagnetic radiation through these regions: D region @ 40-60 miles;
E region 60-80, and F region about 100 to 1000 miles or more above the
surface

daytime aurorae

displays of the aurora borealis or australis which occur in the atmosphere above
the daylit hemisphere of the Earth, and because of this go largely unseen

density

the ratio of the mass of an object to its volume

differential rotation

rotation of a fluid or non-rigid body like the Sun in which different depths
rotate at different rates, with a resultant slippage between them

disk (of the Sun)

the apparent circular shape of the Sun when seen in the sky, resulting from a
two-dimensional projection of a spherical object

distant neutral line

a quasi-permanent site in the far tail of the magnetosphere (at a distance of
more than 300 thousand miles from the Earth’s surface) where lines of magnetic
force emanating from the magnetic northern and southern polar regions of the
Earth are brought in contact with each other, creating a closed field line in the
form of a long loop rooted at high latitudes in the two hemispheres

drag

friction produced when the path of a spacecraft orbiting the Earth takes it
through a denser (lower) part of the atmosphere, resulting in a reduction of
speed and hence a further decrease in the altitude at which it operates

dynamo

a device through which mechanical energy (e.g., in an electric generator, or the
movement of a conductor through a magnetic field) is changed into electric
energy. The solar dynamo works in a similar way by harnessing the mechanical
energy of differential rotation to twist polar field magnetic lines within the
Sun into toroidal fields (perpendicular to the Sun’s axis of rotation.) These in
turn give rise to sunspots when they are carried upward by convection to the
solar surface
267
Back to Table of Contents

E
eccentricity (of an ellipse)

a measure of the extent to which an orbit, such as that of the Earth around the
Sun, departs from a perfect circle

ecliptic plane

the plane defined by the path of the Earth’s orbit around the Sun, fixed by
the 23° tilt of the Earth’s axis of rotation. As such, the ecliptic also defines the
apparent path followed by the Sun across the celestial sphere in the course of
one year: ascending higher in the sky in summer and lower in winter

electric field

a region of space in which a detectable electric intensity is present at every
point

effective temperature

the temperature of a portion of the terrestrial or solar atmosphere defined by
comparing the amount of energy it radiates with that emitted from an ideal
radiator that is heated and cooled by radiation alone

electromagnetic radiation

radiation consisting of oscillating electric and magnetic fields, including
gamma rays, visible light, ultraviolet and infrared radiation, radio waves and
microwaves

electromagnetic spectrum

the entire range or electromagnetic radiation, from gamma rays to
microwaves

electron

a sub-atomic particle with a single negative charge and a mass of less than
1/1000 that of a proton, the corresponding positively-charged particle

electron volt; eV

the energy required to raise an electron through a potential of one volt

electrostatic discharge; ESD

the release of electric energy from a stationary (or static) charge, such as that
built up when walking across a woolen rug or collected on the outer, metallic
surface of a spacecraft

el Niño, la Niña

opposite phases of a quasi-periodic worldwide climatic change, persisting for
268

three or more seasons, which is initiated by either a pronounced warming (or
for la Niña, a pronounced cooling) of surface waters in the tropical eastern
Pacific Ocean

ENSO (El Niño Southern Oscillation)

the combination of three related climatological phenomena: el Niño, la Niña,
and the large-scale, seesaw exchange in sea-level air pressure between areas of
the western and the southeastern Pacific known as the Southern Oscillation

equatorial orbit

a spacecraft orbit around the Earth that remains within north temperate,
equatorial, and south temperate latitudes

erg

a metric unit of energy equal to the work done by a force of one dyne (the force
required to accelerate one gram of mass by one centimeter per second2 , or as
the late George Abell once described it, about the energy exerted by a fly doing
a pushup

EVA (extra-vehicular activity)

manned spaceflight ventures that take astronauts outside the protective structure
of the spacecraft, including surface excursions on the Moon or other planets

exosphere

the region of relatively constant high temperature in the Earth’s atmosphere
above an altitude of about 600 miles. Here the few neutral atoms and molecules
that remain are on their way out of the atmosphere, due to their high thermal
velocities and the very low density of the region

extreme-ultraviolet; EUV

high-energy, short-wave electromagnetic radiation between wavelengths of 10
and 200 nanometers (100 to 2000 angstroms)

F
facula (plural, faculae)

irregular patches in either the photosphere or chromosphere that appear
brighter than their less disturbed surroundings as a result of the weak, vertical
magnetic flux tubes that are concentrated there

filament

a chromospheric prominence seen on the disk of the Sun in the light of a
hydrogen absorption line as a sinuous line, darker than its surroundings. The
same feature observed at the limb would appear as a bright solar prominence
269
Back to Table of Contents

firn

glacial snow that has been partially compressed by thawing and freezing but
not yet converted to glacial ice

flare; solar flare

a sudden and highly-localized increase in the brightness and the energy released
from a restricted area on the solar surface which is most often located within a
complex solar active region; thought to be provoked by instabilities in magnetic
structures that cause opposite field lines to reconnect in a very small volume of
material. in some ways like a short circuit between two electrical wires

fossil fuel

a carbon-based fuel (such as coal, oil or natural gas) that is formed in the Earth
from plant or animal remains of a much earlier era

frequency

the number of electromagnetic waves that cross a given point per unit time, for
example 60 per second for U.S. electric power, 97.3 million for an FM radio
broadcast

G
galactic cosmic rays; GCRs
see cosmic rays

galaxy

a large assemblage of stars, nebulae, and interstellar gas and dust, of which the
Milky Way, the galaxy in which our Sun is located, is an example

gamma rays

the most energetic form of electromagnetic radiation, of shorter wavelength
and higher energy than x-rays, which is the next most energetic
			

gap, or slot region

a depleted zone that separates the Earth’s inner and outer radiation belts—
extending from about 12,000 to 16,000 miles above the surface of the Earth—
in which protons but few if any electrons are found

geosynchronous (geostationary) orbit

an orbit at a distance from the Earth of about 22,200 miles, at which altitude an
orbiting object revolves around the equator of the Earth in synchrony with the
Earth’s rate of rotation. Satellites that orbit the Earth in this way appear fixed in
the sky, always remaining above a fixed geographical region on its surface
270

geotail; geomagnetic tail; magnetotail

the extension of the magnetosphere formed on the night-side of the Earth as
its magnetic field is swept downstream by the pressure of the solar wind. The
geotail acts as a giant energy reservoir for the magnetosphere and plays an
important role in geomagnetic storms and other dynamic processes

global electric circuit

the cumulative effect of all the thunderstorms that charge the ionosphere
to a potential of several hundred keV with respect to the Earth’s surface.
The difference in electric potential that thunderstorms create drives vertical
electric currents downward from the ionosphere to the ground in regions
where thunderstorms do not occur, completing the circuit

granule

the top of one of the close-packed, subsurface convective cells seen in the solar
photosphere; their all-over pattern, called solar granulation, covers the entire
photospheric surface

great circle

the intersection of a plane passing through the center of the Earth with its
surface, which defines the shortest distance between two points on the surface
of the spherical Earth. A great circle course—the path followed in long-distance
air and ship travel—will appear as a curved line when plotted on a navigational
chart

ground-induced current; geomagnetically-induced current; GIC

sudden surges of 10s to 100s of amperes of direct current that instantly
flow through unintended conductors such as ground wires, railroad tracks,
pipelines, or underground wires that happen to connect areas of different
electric potential on the surface of the Earth. These differences in ground
potential can arise immediately from large solar-driven changes in the
magnetosphere and ionosphere

H
half-life

the time required for half of the radioactive nuclei or other unstable particles
in a sample of material of any kind to disintegrate, which for radiocarbon (14C)
is 5,730 years

heavy elements

chemical elements with atomic numbers greater than 2, which includes all
271
Back to Table of Contents

elements in the periodic table other than (and also heavier than) hydrogen and
helium, the two most abundant in the Sun

heliopause

the outer boundary of the heliosphere, at which place the solar wind becomes
indistinguishable from the local interstellar medium

heliophysics

the comprehensive study of the Sun and the region of space over which it
wields influence, involving all scientific disciplines that study the Sun and the
Earth, near-Earth space, the inner planets, and the processes that link these
together
					

helioseismology

the study of the Sun’s interior deduced from the observable oscillations of its
surface

heliosheath

the region of subsonic flow that stands between the termination shock in the
extended solar wind and the outer boundary of the heliosphere

heliosphere

the vast region surrounding the Sun dominated by atomic particles and
magnetic fields that are carried away from the Sun by the solar wind

high-speed solar wind; high-speed stream

solar particles and imbedded magnetic fields (plasma) driven out from the
outer atmosphere of the Sun at speeds of about 400 to more than 500 miles
per second, originating from coronal holes and other open-field regions in the
corona

Holocene epoch

the roughly 11,000 year period of time in Earth history between the end of the
last Ice Age and the present day

hydrologic cycle

the continual, cyclic exchange of the Earth’s supply of water among what is
held in the atmosphere, the oceans, lakes, and rivers, and the solid Earth

I
infrared; infrared radiation

electromagnetic radiation of wavelength longer than visible light (beyond the
272

darkest red we can see) but shorter than radio waves, and which produces the
sensation of heat

inner radiation belt

the innermost of the two concentric Van Allen belts of trapped atomic particles
that surround the Earth in the equatorial region. The inner belt contains more
energetic electrons, protons and heavier ions and extends upward from the top
of the atmosphere to a height of about 12,000 miles

insolation

electromagnetic radiation from the Sun that falls on the top of the Earth’s
atmosphere

interplanetary magnetic field; IMF

the extension of the magnetic field of the Sun throughout the heliosphere

ion

a neutral atom that has become electrically charged by the addition or loss of
one or more electrons

ionization; ionize

any process by which an atom loses electrons

ionizing radiation

high-energy atomic particles (such as cosmic rays) that are capable of dislodging
bound electrons from neutral atoms through the force of collisional impact,
and thus ionize them. Not to be confused with electromagnetic radiation

ionosphere

the electrically-conducting region in the upper atmosphere made up of three
horizontal layers extending from about 35 to more than 1000 miles above the
surface, which are produced by the ionization of neutral atoms of air by shortwave solar radiation (see also D, E, and F regions)

irradiance; solar irradiance

electromagnetic radiation in all wavelengths received from the Sun at the top
of the Earth’s atmosphere in units of energy per square area

isotope

an atom (for example, oxygen-18) that has the same number of protons but a
different number of neutrons in its nucleus, and hence a different mass than
the common, non-isotopic form, (in this case, oxygen-16)

273
Back to Table of Contents

K
kinetic energy

energy possessed by a body as a result of its motion, equal to half the product
of its mass and the square of its speed

kinetic temperature

a temperature directly related to the average speed of atoms or molecules in a
substance such as air

L
Lagrangian point

places in the combined gravitational fields of the Sun, Earth and Moon where
a spacecraft or other object will not be pulled toward any of them

limb (of the Sun)

the apparent, circular edge of the Sun as we see it in the sky

luminosity

the rate at which electromagnetic energy is emitted from the Sun

M
magnetic declination; magnetic variation

that part of the difference in degrees between the direction of true North and
that indicated on a magnetic compass, due to the changing position of the
Earth’s magnetic pole, which changes with time and location on the Earth

magnetic deviation

that part of the difference in degrees between the direction of true North and
that indicated on a magnetic compass at a specific location, which is due to the
local presence of iron

magnetic field

the portion of space near a magnetic body (such as the Sun) or a currentcarrying body (such as an electric power line) in which there is a detectable
magnetic force at every point in the region

magnetic field lines; magnetic lines of force

imaginary lines (like the arrows used to show wind flow direction on a
meteorological chart) that indicate the direction of the magnetic force at any
274

point in a magnetic field. A compass needle aligns itself along these local lines
of force of the Earth’s field

magnetic reconnection; magnetic merging

a process through which oppositely-directed. closed magnetic field lines come
into contact, sever, and join to form new magnetic field structures. In the
process part of the magnetic energy contained in the magnetic field is converted
into thermal or kinetic energy

magnetic pole

either of two non-fixed points on the Earth, close to but not coincident with
the north and south rotational poles, where the Earth’s magnetic field is most
intense and where magnetic field lines are most nearly perpendicular to the
Earth’s surface

magnetic storm; (geomagnetic storm)

a severe but transitory fluctuation in the Earth’s magnetic field, evident initially
as a sharp decrease in the strength of the horizontal component of the Earth’s
magnetic field, felt around the world and lasting a few hours, followed by a
recovery phase lasting a day to several days. Geomagnetic storms are most often
initiated when regions of enhanced solar wind flow compress the steady-state
form of the magnetosphere on its Sun-facing side

magnetometer

a classical instrument employed since the 1820s to measure the intensity of
the Earth’s magnetic field at a given point on the surface of the planet, and in
modern form, to record minute-to-minute variations as a function of time

magnetopause

the outer boundary of the Earth’s magnetosphere, where the strength of the
solar wind magnetic field surpasses that of the Earth. Though highly variable,
it is typically 40,000 to 60,000 miles away from the Earth on the Sun-facing
side, and much farther away on the down-wind side

magnetosheath

the region of slowed, heated and turbulent solar wind that lies between the
bow shock in the incoming solar wind and the Earth’s magnetopause

magnetosphere

the region around the Earth occupied by its magnetic field

Maunder Minimum

a distinctive period between about AD 1645 and 1715 when sunspots and
solar activity were very much depressed
275
Back to Table of Contents

mesopause

the upper boundary of the mesosphere and lower boundary of the thermosphere,
which lies just above it

mesosphere

the upper part of the middle atmosphere of the Earth, extending from about
30 to 53 miles above the surface, in which air temperature falls monotonically
from about plus 200 to minus 135° F

Milankovitch effect

the combined effects of three subtle changes in the orbit of the Earth and its
axis of rotation, acting over periods of tens of thousands of years, which work
together to reapportion in time and reallocate in space the continuous flow of
energy that the Sun delivers to the Earth

molecule

atomic nuclei and electrons from one or more different elements that are bound
together, such as water (H2O) or molecular oxygen, O2

muon

an unstable sub-atomic particle with a lifetime of about 10-6 seconds, a mass
about 200 times greater than an electron, and a negative electrical charge.
Muons are among the “secondary particles” released when cosmic rays impact
atoms or molecules of air in the upper and middle atmosphere

N
near-Earth neutral line

a region within the Earth’s geomagnetic tail, at a distance of about 96,000 miles
from the surface at which, during magnetic storms, magnetic field lines of
opposite polarity rooted in the two magnetic poles of the Earth come together
and reconnect. This results in a closed field line along which solar and other
charged particles in the geotail are redirected back toward the Earth

near-infrared

the portion of the infrared spectrum of solar electromagnetic radiation that lies
just beyond the limit of the visible portion, extending between wavelengths of
about 700 and 7000 nanometers [7000 angstroms to 7 microns]

near-ultraviolet

the portion of the ultraviolet spectrum of solar electromagnetic radiation that
adjoins the visible spectrum, extending between wavelengths of about 200 and
400 nanometers [2000 to 4000 angstroms]
276

neutral line

one of two regions in the magnetotail where stretched-out open magnetic field
lines of opposite polarity, attached at the Earth’s north and south magnetic
poles, are brought in contact, allowing a return path for captive particles in the
magnetotail to be channeled back toward the planet

neutron

a subatomic particle with no charge and of mass approximately equal to that of
a proton (which is the other principal constituent of the nucleus of any atom)

neutron monitor

a device installed at high-altitude stations to detect the passage of neutrons
resulting from collisions between cosmic rays and atoms or molecules in the
Earth’s atmosphere, as a measure of the flux of cosmic rays that produce these
collisions

North Atlantic Oscillation; NAO

a quasi-regular, back-and-forth oscillation in sea-level air pressure between largescale regions in the North Atlantic Ocean, which in terms of climatic function
resembles the oscillatory ENSO phenomenon of the equatorial Pacific Ocean

northern lights

aurorae seen in the Northern hemisphere

nucleus (of an atom)

the heavy part of an atom, composed mostly of protons and neutrons, about
which electrons revolve

O
open field line; open magnetic field line

a magnetic line of force in the magnetic field of either the Sun or the Earth, one
end of which is rooted in the photosphere or at the surface of the Earth, and
the other drawn away and detached by dynamic forces

outer radiation belt

the outer of the two concentric Van Allen belts of trapped atomic particles that
surround the Earth in the equatorial region. The outer belt is separated from
the inner belt by a 4000 mile gap, and extends above the surface of the planet
from about 16,000 to 24,000 (and at times as far as 36,000) miles. Within it
are the lighter and less energetic trapped particles: primarily weaker electrons
with energies in the range of 10,000 to about one million electron volts

277
Back to Table of Contents

ozone layer; stratospheric ozone layer

the region in the Earth’s middle atmosphere, between altitudes of about 25
and 65 miles above the surface, where almost all atmospheric ozone is found.
The remainder is created in the form of air pollution at ground level in the
photosphere

P
penumbra (of a sunspot)

a less-dark, roughly annular region surrounding the dark, cooler central portion
of a sunspot, made up of a radial fine structure of dark and bright filaments

photic zone

that region of the upper ocean into which sunlight penetrates, extending
(depending upon the clarity of water and the wavelength of light) to about
650 feet below the surface: greatest in the blue and least in the ultraviolet
and infrared

photon

a discrete packet of electromagnetic radiation whose energy is directly
proportional to the frequency of radiation and is thus much greater for an
ultraviolet photon than one in the infrared					

photosphere

the region of the solar atmosphere from which all visible light and heat are
radiated into space. The intangible surface we see when we look at the Sun in
visible light

photosynthesis

the process by which plant cells containing chlorophyll convert incident sunlight
into chemical energy, and thereby synthesize needed cellulose for plant growth
from carbon dioxide and water, with the release of oxygen

pion

an unstable sub-atomic particle with a lifetime of about 10-8 seconds, a mass about
260 times greater than an electron, and either a neutral or negative charge

plage

a bright region seen in the Sun’s photosphere or chromosphere

plasma

an often very hot, electrically-neutral gas composed of an approximately equal
number of electrons and protons, capable of carrying an imbedded magnetic field
278

plasmapause

the outer boundary of the Earth’s plasmasphere and inner boundary of the
magnetosphere					

plasma sheet

the central and densest part of the Earth’s magnetotail, consisting of a
compressed sheet that extends downwind of the Sun for at least 950,000 miles
from the Earth, separating the northern and southern lobes of the tail, which
have opposite magnetic polarity. The plasma sheet is a major storage region for
ionized particles in the geomagnetic tail

plasmasphere

the upward extension of the Earth’s ionosphere into the exosphere, within and
co-existing with the magnetosphere, which reaches on its Sun-facing side from
about 1000 miles to as much as a million miles above the surface. It consists
of a relatively low-energy plasma and takes its form as charged particles from
the ionosphere flow upward to fill the relative vacuum of space surrounding
the Earth

plate tectonics

the movement of segments, or plates, of the encrusted, outer layers of the solid
Earth over the hotter and more fluid underlying mantle

Pleistocene epoch

the earlier of the two epochs of the Quaternary period of Earth history,
extending from about a million years until 11,000 years before the present and
characterized by the alternate appearance and recession of northern glaciation

polar cap

in auroral nomenclature, the area around either the north or south magnetic
pole of the Earth bounded by the inner boundary of the auroral oval. Here,
poleward of the auroral oval, auroras are more frequent but weaker, more
diffuse and less variable than in the auroral oval itself

polar cap aurora

aurorae, seen throughout the solar cycle, that occur outside the bounded region
of the auroral oval, in the space that separates it from the magnetic pole

polar cusps

the singular regions over the Earth’s magnetic poles where magnetic field lines
are nearly perpendicular to the Earth’s surface, creating an “opening” in the
magnetosphere that allows charged particles paths of easier entry into the
upper atmosphere

279
Back to Table of Contents

polar orbit (around the Earth)

a spacecraft orbit that passes over the polar (as opposed to restricted to middle
and equatorial) latitudes of the Earth. For spaceborne instruments that
observe the Sun, a polar orbit offers the opportunity for continuous 24-hour
monitoring. The present polar orbit of the Ulysses spacecraft around the Sun
was chosen to allow the first observations of much of the solar poles and to
explore conditions in the solar wind above them

polar plumes

coronal rays extending like a crown outward from the two magnetic poles of
the Sun, that outline the open magnetic field lines which emanate there

positive ion

an ion formed by the loss of one or more of the electrons from a neutral atom,
resulting in an atomic particle of net positive charge

primary cosmic ray

a high-energy atomic particle that arrives at the Earth from beyond the planet,
as opposed to the secondary cosmic rays that are formed as a result of a collision
of a primary with an atom or molecule of air in the Earth’s atmosphere

prominence; solar prominence

a shapely extension of chromospheric material into the corona, formed and
suspended there by magnetic fields, which is visible at the limb of the Sun or
on the disk (where it is called a solar filament)

proton

heavy subatomic particle of unit positive charge which is one of the two
principal constituents (the other, neutrons) of the nuclei of atoms

proxy record

data regarding past solar behavior that is obtained indirectly, derived from what
is known of the Sun’s impacts on other physical phenomena such as aurorae or
records of tree-ring radiocarbon or ice-core beryllium-10

Q
quiescent prominence

a long-lived and relatively stationary solar prominence, in contrast to those
that are more active or eruptive

280

R
radiant energy

electromagnetic energy emitted from the Sun

radiation

here used to mean electromagnetic energy, as defined above. When qualified as
“particle radiation” it is often conventionally used to refer to the kinetic energy
of high energy particles

radiation belts; Van Allen belts

two concentric areas of trapped electrons, protons and ions held within the
closed part of the Earth’s magnetic field, from about 600 miles to 25,000 miles
above the surface

radiative zone

a voluminous region in the solar interior, between the innermost core and
the outer convective zone, where radiation is the dominant mode of outward
energy transport

radio frequency spectrum

the lowest frequency, lowest energy portion of the total spectrum of
electromagnetic radiation from the Sun, which includes radio waves of all
wavelengths

radio telescope

an antenna or set of antennas designed to make observations of the Sun or
other astronomical objects based on their emission of radio waves

radio waves

electromagnetic radiation emitted in the radio frequency spectrum

red giant

a star that is larger and cooler than the Sun

resolution

spatial resolution: the degree to which a telescope can distinguish, or resolve,
fine details in the image it produces, expressed in terms of an angle in the sky,
such as 1 arc second; temporal resolution: the shortest interval of time for
which information can be distinguished

ring current

an electrical current produced in the equatorial plane within the closed part of
the Earth’s magnetic field where properties of the magnetic field cause ions and
electrons to drift in opposite directions
281
Back to Table of Contents

rotation

the turning of the Earth (one turn in 24 hours) or the Sun (in about 27 days)
about an axis that passes through it

S
scattering

the dispersal of a beam of light into a spread of directions as a result of physical
interactions: in the daytime sky, the redirection of incoming sunlight across
the dome of the sky by its interaction with molecules of air; in the white-light
corona, the redirection of photospheric radiation by free electrons

scintillation

a flickering of electromagnetic radiation caused by its passage through turbulent
media: examples are the twinkling of stars caused by the passage of starlight
through turbulence and inhomogeneities in the air; and irregular deflections in
the passage of radio waves through layers of electrons in the ionosphere

secondary cosmic ray

a secondary or “daughter” particle produced by collisions between primary
cosmic rays from space and the atomic nuclei of atoms and molecules in the
Earth’s atmosphere

sectors

discrete, wedge-shaped segments, centered on the Sun, in the expanding solar
wind in which the magnetic polarity of the source region on the Sun is carried
outward in the plasma and preserved. They are sensed at the Earth (as they
sweep by with solar rotation) as distinct changes in the prevailing polarity of
the solar wind

seismology

the study of earthquakes and the internal structure of the solid Earth deduced
from the analysis of reflected sound waves

shock wave

an abrupt change in temperature, speed, density and pressure in a moving
plasma, produced by the movement of an object traveling through the medium
at a speed greater than the local speed of sound, that can accelerate energetic
particles and trigger geomagnetic phenomena. A similar phenomenon occurs
in the Earth’s atmosphere when an aircraft reaches supersonic speed

short-wave radiation

electromagnetic radiation from the Sun in the ultraviolet, x-ray and gamma ray
region of the spectrum
282

single event effect; SEE

a malfunction or failure of a piece of electronic equipment in a spacecraft that is
traceable to the impact of a single high-energy particle such as a solar energetic
proton or cosmic ray particle

single event upset; SEU

the malfunction or failure in a micro-circuit most often traced to the action of a
single incoming heavy ion, from the Sun or the cosmos that deposits sufficient
electrical charge on a sensitive circuit element to cause it to change state

slow-speed solar wind; slow speed stream

solar particles and imbedded magnetic fields (plasma) driven outward from the
outer atmosphere of the Sun at an average speed of about 200 miles per second,
most often from coronal streamers

solar activity

phenomena on the Sun such as sunspots, plages, flares, and CMEs whose
frequency of occurrence is related to the 11-year sunspot cycle

solar atmosphere

the photosphere, chromosphere, and corona of the Sun

solar constant

the total amount of radiant energy received from the Sun per unit time per unit
area at the top of the Earth’s atmosphere, at mean Sun-Earth distance. Once
thought, erroneously, to be constant, the term has now been supplanted by the
more precise term, total solar irradiance

solar cycle; sunspot cycle

the roughly 11-year cyclic variation in the state of activity on the Sun, most
apparent in annual averages of the number of sunspots seen on its white-light
surface

solar dynamo

the internal mechanism that generates sunspots and magnetically active regions
on the surface of the Sun through the interaction of convection, differential
rotation, and magnetic fields within the solar interior

solar energetic proton; SEP

a proton ejected from the Sun with an energy in the 1 to 500 meV range,
which is potentially damaging due to its heavy mass and high speed

solar equator

a great circle on the Sun, midway between its rotational poles
283
Back to Table of Contents

solar granulation

the pattern of closely-packed convective cells that covers the photospheric
surface of the Sun

solar interior

the bulk of the Sun that lies beneath the photosphere, consisting of its nuclear
core and overlying radiation and convective zones

solar irradiance

radiant energy received from the Sun per unit time and unit area at the top of
the Earth’s atmosphere

solar magnetic cycle

the 22-year combination of two eleven-year cycles of solar activity needed for
the surface magnetic field of the Sun to switch from one polarity to the other
and back again

solar system

the Sun together with the planets and all other objects that revolve about it

solar wind

the continual release of atomic particles and imbedded magnetic fields (plasma)
from the Sun resulting from the thermal expansion of the corona

South Atlantic Anomaly; SAA

a region located over southern South America and the South Atlantic Ocean
where the strength of the Earth’s magnetic field is considerably reduced. Because
of this, energetic particles in the Earth’s inner radiation belt are able to penetrate
here more deeply into the thermosphere, to altitudes where spacecraft operate

space weather

the variable state of the magnetosphere, ionosphere and near-Earth space
as perturbed by solar activity and the solar wind: the counterpart of
meteorological weather

space climate

long-term or average conditions in the magnetosphere, ionosphere and nearEarth space: the counterpart of terrestrial climate

spectral irradiance; solar spectral irradiance

electromagnetic radiation in specific wavelengths received from the Sun at the
top of the Earth’s atmosphere

spectrum

the distribution of electromagnetic energy emitted by a radiant source such as
284

the Sun, arranged in order of wavelength, from gamma rays and x-rays to longwave radio emission

spicule

one of many spike-like jets of rising gas in the chromosphere, about 600 miles
wide and about ten times as high, with a lifetime of about 15 minutes

Spörer Minimum

a distinctive period between about AD 1450 and 1540. evident in the record of
tree-ring radiocarbon, when the level of solar activity was much reduced

stratopause

the upper limit of the Earth’s stratosphere and lower limit of the mesosphere

stratosphere

the atmosphere extending above the troposphere to an altitude of about 30
miles that exhibits warming with height, the result of the absorption of solar
radiant energy by stratospheric ozone

streamer; coronal streamer

a major structure in the outer corona consisting of a magnetically-formed
bulbous base near the Sun that is reduced in diameter and swept outward by
the solar wind into an extended tapered shape

sunspot

a distinctive, activity-related region in the photosphere, the embodiment of a
very strong magnetic field that is cooler and hence darker than the surrounding
photosphere

sunspot cycle; solar cycle

the roughly 11-year cycle of variation in the number of sunspots visible on
the solar disk: a manifestation of a more fundamental cyclic variation in the
number of solar magnetic fields that are brought to the surface from the interior
of the Sun

sunspot number

an historical index of solar activity defined in the 1860s as the number of
spots that are visible on the Sun at any time plus ten times the number of
groups of sunspots, multiplied by a factor intended to correct for differences in
telescopes, observing sites, and observers

sunspot maximum or minimum; solar maximum or minimum

the years when the 11-year sunspot cycle reaches its maximum or minimum
level

285
Back to Table of Contents

supergiant

a very large, extremely luminous star

super-granulation

convective cells-each of which is up to 200 times larger than those found in
the photosphere—which covers the entire surface of the chromosphere in an
all-over closely-packed pattern. Like the granules seen immediately below
them in the photosphere, they are a consequence of the tumultuous release of
energy from the interior convective zone of the Sun, and the organizing of large
numbers of photospheric cells into a far larger pattern

suprathermal particles

highly accelerated atomic particles with energies of up to a million or more
electron volts, corresponding to temperatures of billions of degrees

T
tachocline

the shear layer in the solar interior between the inner radiation zone and the
convective zone that lies above it, thought to be the site of origin of the solar
dynamo

termination shock

a shock wave that forms at the place in the outer heliosphere where the solar
wind first begins to feel the competing force of stellar winds. In passing through
it, the solar wind slows from supersonic (about a million miles per hour) to
subsonic speeds

terrestrial

pertaining to the Earth and its inhabitants

Tertiary period

the period of Earth history following the Cretaceous and preceding the
Quaternary, extending from about 63 million years until about 2 million years
before the present

thermal electrons

electrons with energies per particle in the range from a few electron volts (eV)
to 100, representing temperatures of 10,000 to 106° F, typical of particles
found in the chromosphere, transition zone, and corona of the Sun

thermal energy

energy associated with the temperature-driven movements of atoms or
molecules in a substance
286

thermal inertia

a property of matter expressing its capacity to retain heat

thermohaline circulation

vertical ocean circulation driven by differences in the temperature and salinity
of seawater

thermosphere

the uppermost layer of the Earth’s atmosphere, extending from an altitude
of about 50 to more than 1000 miles, where absorption of short-wave solar
radiation heats the gas to very high temperatures

toroidal; toroid

a surface generated by the rotation of a closed curve, such as a circle, about
an axis lying in its own plane, creating a three-dimensional object like a
doughnut

total solar eclipse; total eclipse

an eclipse of the Sun in which the photosphere is entirely covered by the lunar
disk, darkening the sky and allowing observers within the moving shadow of
the Moon to see the dim solar corona

total solar irradiance

electromagnetic energy in all wavelengths received from the Sun at the top of
the Earth’s atmosphere

transition zone

the thin shell between the Sun’s chromosphere and corona, where the
temperature climbs from about 10,000 to more than a million° F

Trojan asteroid

one of a group of asteroids (minor planets) that share Jupiter’s orbit about
the Sun

tropopause

the upper limit of the troposphere and lower limit of the stratosphere, at an
altitude of about seven miles above sea-level, though somewhat higher in the
tropics

troposphere

the lowest region of the Earth’s atmosphere, extending from the surface to the
tropopause (about 7 miles high) and characterized by decreasing temperature
with increasing altitude; the locus of all weather and climate

287
Back to Table of Contents

U
ultraviolet radiation

invisible, electromagnetic radiation of shorter wavelength and greater energy
per photon than that of visible light, spanning wavelengths between about 100
to 4000 angstroms (10 to 400 nanometers)

ultraviolet spectrum

that portion of the spectrum of electromagnetic radiation that extends from
about 100 to 4000 angstroms

umbra (of a sunspot)

the dark central region of a sunspot that is often circumscribed by a slightly more
luminous penumbra. Sunspot umbrae define intrusions in the photosphere of
highly-concentrated, local magnetic fields that inhibit the flow of energy from
below and are hence cooler and less bright than the surrounding photosphere

universe

all space, including the totality of all matter and radiation

UV-A and UV-B

two adjoining bands of potentially-damaging incoming solar ultraviolet
radiation that can reach the surface of the Earth, as opposed to the shorter
wavelength and more energetic UV-C which is entirely blocked by atmospheric
oxygen high in the atmosphere. Direct exposure to either UV-A (3150 to 4000
angstroms wavelength) or UV-B (2800 to 3150 angstroms) radiation can
damage the skin and eyes and human immune system, although the more
energetic UV-B is the greater threat in terms of potential skin cancer

V
visible spectrum

the portion of the spectrum of electromagnetic radiation that can be sensed by
the human eye, including all colors of the rainbow from the barely visible violet
(about 3900 angstroms wavelength) to the dark and barely visible red (about
6600 angstroms)

W
wavelength

a metric used to distinguish different parts of the spectrum of electromagnetic
288

radiation, equal to the distance separating two successive crests in a wave of
radiation
UNITS OF WAVELENGTH
UNIT

IN METERS

meter (m)

EQUIVALENT

REGION OF
ELECTROMAGNETIC
SPECTRUM

100 cm

radio waves

centimeter (cm)

10-2 meters

10 mm

radio waves

millimeter (mm)

10-3 meters

1000 μ

microwaves

micron (μ)

10 meters

1000 nm

nanometer (nm)

10 meters

10 Å

angstrom (Å)

10-10 meters

-6

-9

infrared waves
visible and ultraviolet waves
visible, ultraviolet, x-ray and
g-rays

wave-particle interaction

an interaction between a charged atomic particle and ambient electromagnetic
radiation that can alter the energy of the particle or disturb its path and manner
of movement. This can occur in the presence of electromagnetic radiation of a
frequency that happens to resonate with the particle’s own motion

white-light

the combination of light of all colors in the visible spectrum of electromagnetic
radiation. The disk of the Sun, which appears white to us, is an example, as is
the white color of clouds or the solar corona, both of which represent scattered
light from the white photosphere

X
x-rays

extremely high energy, short-wave electromagnetic radiation in the wavelength
range from 1 to 100 angstroms

289
Back to Table of Contents

290

SOURCES FOR ADDITIONAL
INFORMATION
Books
Nearest Star: The Surprising Science of our Sun

by L. Golub and J. Pasachoff; Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA,
2001, 267 pp. A popular-level book about the Sun written by two renowned
solar scientists.

The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the Sun

by K.R. Lang; Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 2001, 256
pp. A complete, modern guide to our nearest star, well-illustrated and explained,
in a handsome, over-sized book.

Storms from the Sun: the Emerging Science of Space Weather

by M. Carlowicz and R. Lopez; Joseph Henry Press, Washington, D.C., 2002,
234 pp. A description of the active Sun and space weather and their effects
on the Earth, written at a popular level with emphasis on specific effects of
dynamic solar events on the Earth and society.

Space Weather

edited by P.L. Song, H.J. Singer, and G. L. Siscoe; American Geophysical
Union, Washington, D.C., 440 pp, 2001 A collection of technical articles
dealing with many aspects of space weather.

Effects of Space Weather on Technology Infrastructure

edited by I. A. Daglis; Kluwer Academic Publications, Dordrecht, the
Netherlands. 334 pp. 2004. Review articles dealing with various aspects of
the impact of space weather on human activities, from commercial aircraft to
electric power systems, from a NATO workshop on this subject.

291
Back to Table of Contents

Articles
The Sun: Living with a Stormy Star

by Curt Suplee; in National Geographic, July 2004, pp. 2-33. A current
portrayal of the Sun, solar activity and space weather, illustrated as only the
Geographic can with an awesome collection of diagrams and breath-taking
pictures from space.

Living with a Variable Sun

by Judith Lean; in Physics Today, June, 2005, pp. 32-38. An easily-read and
up-to-date review of solar variability and its effects on the Earth, told by an
acknowledged expert in the field.

Shielding Space Travelers

by Eugene Parker; in Scientific American, March, 2006, pp. 40-47. A popularlevel review of the problem of galactic cosmic rays in space travel, by the
scientist who accurately foretold the existence and characteristics of the solar
wind before it was first discovered.

Some Recommended Web Sites
http://heliophysics.nasa.gov/

A general description of NASA’s program that keeps a round-the-clock watch
on the Sun and its impacts on the Earth and its near environment, including a
summary of current Sun-Earth spacecraft, planned or underway, with access to
specific information about each of them.

http://www.swpc.noaa.gov/

Up-to-the-minute information from NOAA’s 24-hour Space Weather Prediction
Center, including current information on solar activity and conditions in nearEarth space, space weather alerts and warnings that are disseminated worldwide,
and current and predicted sunspot numbers for 11-year solar cycle #23, now
ending, and #24, soon to be underway.

http://srag-nt.jsc.nasa.gov/

Information regarding the monitoring of space-weather at the NASA Space
Radiation Analysis Group at the Johnson Space Center, tailored to the
specific needs of individual manned space flight missions, including a trove
of summarized information on space shuttle missions currently planned or in
progress and the current status of the International Space Station.

292
Back to Table of Contents

http://umbra.nascom.nasa.gov/images/latest.html

Current, daily images of the solar disk, in color and enlargeable to full screensize portraying today’s photosphere, chromosphere, transition region, corona,
magnetic fields and vertical motions derived from Doppler images.

http://climate.gi.alaska.edu/Curtis/aurora.html

A beautiful and enlightening collection of photographs of the aurora borealis
taken in Alaska by a renowned expert, Jan Curtis.

http://www.scostep.ucar.edu

A series of delightfully drawn, up-to-date and expertly written introductory
explanations of different features of the Sun-Earth system, presented in comic
book form, each about 12 pages long. Ingeniously produced in Japan, in
English and other languages, and sponsored by SCOSTEP, the International
Scientific Committee on Solar-Terrestrial Physics. The most recent issue treats
the subject of solar variability and climate. Try them; you’ll like them. size;

293
Back to Table of Contents

294

TABLES
The Planets as Seen from the Sun					
15
Solar Temperatures							
37
Solar Wind Velocities							
50
Manifestations of Solar Activity					
69
Earth’s Radiation Belts							
90
Solar Energy Received at the Earth				
103
Energy and Corresponding Temperature of Atomic Particles		
112
Solar Particles that Impinge upon the Earth				
113
Distances in Units of the Radius of the Earth				
129
Price of Admission for Charged Atomic Particles			
132
Numbers of Solar and Cosmic Particles Incident Upon the Earth
135
Impacts of Solar Variability and Their Origin on the Sun		
140
Energies of Charged Atomic Particles that Strike the Earth		
142
Three Stages of a Magnetic Storm					
146
Types of Auroral Displays						
153
Upper Thermosphere Temperatures					
154
Layers of the Ionosphere						
159
Origins of Solar Radiation and Regions Affected			
160
Impacts of Solar Variability and Their Societal Effects			
162
Dose Rate of Galactic Cosmic Radiation at Aircraft Altitudes		
169
Aircraft Altitudes in Relation to Atmospheric Features			
170
Flight Paths and Hazards of Aircraft and Spacecraft			
175
Manned Space Flights which have left the Magnetosphere		
178
Orbital Altitudes and Proximate Atmospheric Features		
187
Some Major Electric Power Disruptions				
203
Recent Prolonged Episodes of Unusual Levels of Solar Activity
216
Useful Space Weather Predictions					
238
Travel Times from the Sun to the Earth				
241
Principal Hazards of Traveling Beyond the Magnetosphere		
245
Spacecraft that now Study and Monitor the Sun-Earth System 252, 253

295
Back to Table of Contents

296

IMAGES AND ILLUSTRATIONS
Page No.
viii		
2		
12		
18		
21		
22		
25		
27		
28		
33		
39		
41		
42		
44		
48		
49		
52-53		
54		
55		
55		
59		
61		
62		
63		
67		
68		
70		
73		
75		
83		

Source
Hubble Space Telescope
L. Kangas
SOHO, NASA/ESA
NASA
J. Eddy
J. Eddy
SOHO, NASA/ESA
J. Eddy
Swedish Solar Telescope
SOHO, NASA/ESA
HAO
J. Eddy
NASA
NASA
SOHO, TRACE, NASA/ESA
SOHO, NASA/ESA
NASA
SOHO, NASA/ESA
YOHKOH, ISAS
NASA
SOHO, NASA/ESA
SOHO, NASA/ESA
SOHO, NASA/ESA
TRACE
SMM, NASA
SOHO, NASA/ESA
NASA
NASA
NASA
National Academies Press

Page No.
88		
98		
101		
110		
120		
121		
125		
134		
138		
144		
147		
149		
152		
164		
169		
179		
208		
210		
211		
		
214		
218		
220		
222		
226		
231		
234		
244		
251		
254		

Source
NASA
NASA
NASA from J. Lean
SOHO, NASA/ESA
Leonard Burlaga
NASA
NASA from S.A. Fuselier
J. Bieber
Jan Curtis
Y. Kamide
Jan Curtis
Polar Spacecraft, NASA
NASA
NASA
Captain J.B.L. Jones
NASA
Michel Tourney
University of Colorado Library
Astronomical Society of
the Pacific
J. Lean
J. Lean
L.L. Hood
Douglass & Clader
J. Lean
G. Bond, et. al.
NASA
NASA
NASA
J. Eddy

297
Back to Table of Contents

298

INDEX
absorption line			
active prominence			
active region			
adaptive optics			
Advanced Technology Solar Telescope
aerosol				
alpha particle			
anamolous cosmic ray; ACR		
anthropogenic			
astronomical unit (A.U.)		
atom				
atomic weight			
aurora				
aurora australis			
aurora borealis			
auroral oval			
auroral substorms			

221
64
50
26
26
105
132
131
222
253
1
188
7
6
6
151
148

biosphere				
bow shock			
bulk speed			
bulk motion			

159
85
118
115

carbon cycle			
Cassini spacecraft			
Cêrenkov radiation			
chromosphere			
chromospheric network		
climate sensitivity			
closed field line			
CME				
convection			
convection cell			
convection zone			
Copernicus, Nicholas		
corona; solar corona			
coronagraph			
coronal hole			
coronal mass ejection; CME		
coronal streamers			
cosmic rays			
cosmic ray shower, cascade		
cosmogenic nuclide			
cosmos				
Cretaceous period			

159
42
174
34
36
221
50
40
53
13
31
22
35
40
118
40
36
1
133
225
1
58

D, E, and F-regions			
daytime aurorae			
density				

157
152
4

differential rotation			
disk (of the Sun)			
distant neutral line			
dynamo				

32
20
127
33

eccentricity (of an ellipse)		
electric field			
effective temperature		
electromagnetic radiation		
electromagnetic spectrum		
electron				
electron volt; EV			
electrostatic discharge; ESD		
elliptical				
El Niño, la Niña			
ENSO (El Niño Southern Oscillation)
equatorial orbit			
eruptive prominences		
EVA (extra-vehicular activity)		
exosphere				
extreme ultraviolet; EUV		

106
145
74
71
60
1
87
192
106
160
224
184
25
166
81
102

facula (plural, faculae)		
filament				
firn				
flare; solar flare			
fossil fuel				
frequency				

23
60
229
57
3
195

galactic cosmic rays, GCRs		
131
galaxy				
1
Galileo Galilei			
20
gamma rays			
4
gap, or slot region			
89
geomagnetic storm (see magnetic storm) 7
geosynchronous (geostationary) orbit
94
geotail; geomagnetic tail; magnetotail
124
global electric circuit		
155
Goldsmid, Johann			
20
granule				
30
great circle			
169
ground-induced current; geomagnetically
induced current, GIC		
201
half-life				
Harriot, Thomas			
heavy elements			
heliopause			
heliophysics			

227
20
83
92
9

299
Back to Table of Contents

helioseismology			
heliosheath			
heliosphere			
high-speed solar wind; high-speed stream
Holocene epoch			
hydrologic cycle			

31
96
45
148
230
159

infrared; infrared radiation		
inner radiation belt			
insolation				
interplanetary magnetic field; IMF
ion				
ionization; ionize			
ionizing radiation			
ionosphere			
isotope				

19
89
225
143
4
35
168
79
219

kinetic energy			
kinetic temperature			

47
74

Lagrangian point			
limb (of the Sun)			
luminosity			

185
29
18

magnetic field			
4
magnetic field lines; magnetic
lines of force			
31
magnetic reconnection; magnetic merging 47
magnetic pole			
7
magnetic storm (geomagnetic storm)
7
magnetometer			
205
magnetopause			
82
magnetosheath			
124
magnetosphere			
71
Maunder Minimum			
56
mesopause			
78
mesosphere			
78
Milankovitch effect			
107
molecule				
1
Muir, John			
10
muon				
133
NASA, est. 1958			
near-Earth neutral line		
near-infrared			
near-ultraviolet			
neutral line			
neutron				
neutron monitor			
North Atlantic Oscillation; NAO
northern lights			
nucleus (of an atom)		
open field line; open magnetic field line
outer radiation belt			
ozone layer; stratospheric ozone layer

penumbra (of a sunspot)		
photic zone			
photon				
photosphere			
photosynthesis			
pion				
plage				
planets, seen from Sun		
plasma				
plasmapause			
plasma sheet			
plasmasphere			
plate tectonics			
Pleistocene epoch			
polar cap				
polar cap aurora			
polar cusps			
polar orbit (around the Earth)		
polar plumes			
positive ion			
primary cosmic ray			
prominence; solar prominence		
proton				
proxy record; proxy data		

27
225
102
13
3
133
69
15
35
92
124
91
159
131
126
152
86
94
37
87
90
36
1
56

quiescent prominence		

64

radiant energy			
radiation				
radiation belts; Van Allen belts		
radiative zone			
radio frequency spectrum		
radio telescope			
radio waves			
red giant				
resolution				
ring current			
rotation (of the Earth)		

17
15
88
32
103
239
1
16
40
145
173

satellite drag			
184
Saturn				
21
Scheiner, Christopher		
20
scattering				
21
scintillation			
197
secondary cosmic ray		
90
sectors				
46
seismology			
31
shock wave			
113
short-wave radiation			
4
single event effect; SEE		
192
single event upset; SEU		
192
skylight, color of			
24
slow-speed solar wind; slow speed stream 49
solar activity			
51
solar atmosphere			
34
solar constant			
99

6
127
19
77
126
45
133
224
148
182
50
89
74

300

solar cycle; sunspot cycle		
solar dynamo			
solar energetic proton; SEP		
solar equator			
solar granulation			
solar interior			
solar irradiance			
solar magnetic cycle			
solar system			
solar wind			
South Atlantic Anomoly; SAA		
space weather			
space climate			
spectrum				
spicule				
Spörer Minimum			
SRAG, Space Radiation Analysis Group
stratopause			
stratosphere			
streamer; coronal streamer		
Sun, age of			
Sun, energy source			
Sun, expected lifetime		
sunshine tax			
Sun, power in kilowatts		
sunspot				
sunspot cycle; solar cycle		
sunspot number			
sunspot maximum or minimum; solar
maximum or minimum		
Sun, temperatures of		
supergiant			
super-granulation cells		
suprathermal particles		
SWPC, Space Weather
Prediction Center			

5
33
115
13
30
14
212
52
1
45
174
235
235
17
36
56
246
77
76
36
15
3
16
15
15
14
19
51

Swedish Solar Telescope		
System Observatory			

28
9

tachocline				
termination shock			
Tertiary period			
thermal electrons			
thermal energy			
thermal inertia			
thermohaline circulation		
thermosphere			
Thompson, Francis			
toroidal, toroid			
total solar eclipse; total eclipse		
total solar irradiance			
transition zone			
Trojan asteroid			
tropopause			
troposphere			

33
93
58
111
113
79
224
78
10
32
34
99
35
186
76
75

ultraviolet radiation			
ultraviolet spectrum			
umbra (of a sunspot)		
universe				
UV-A and UV-B			

172
17
27
15
6

Van Allen radiation belts		
visible spectrum			

88
17

5
16
13
36
91

wavelength			
wave-particle interaction		
white light			

17
89
24

x-rays				

172

246

The Index is intended as a guide for locating the initial or principal reference for specific technical
words or phrases.
301
Back to Table of Contents

SUN-EARTH SYSTEM

Dr. John A. Eddy is a graduate of the U.S. Naval Academy and the University of Colorado who is best
known for his work in recovering the history of the Sun
and establishing the reality and nature of extended
periods of anomalous solar behavior in the distant
past, such as the Maunder Minimum of 1645 to 1715.
He is known as well for his investigations of the
astronomy of early Indians of the American plains; as
a scientific editor and popular interpreter of science;
and for many years, in promoting the interdisciplinary
study of global environmental change. He is a fellow
of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science and a recipient of the Arctowski Prize of the
National Academy of Sciences for pioneering work in
solar-terrestrial physics. He now works at the National
Solar Observatory in Tucson, where he lives with his
wife Barbara.

A GUIDE
TO THE

JOHN A. EDDY

JOHN A. EDDY

