THE SPACE TECHNOLOGY LmRARY
Published jointly by Microcosm Press and Kluwer Academic Publishers

An Introduction to Mission Designfor Geostationary Satellites, J. J. Poeba
Space Mission Analysis and Design, 1st edition, James R. Wertz and Wiley J. Larson
"'Space Mission Analysis and Design, 2nd edition. Wiley J. Larson and James R. Wertz
*Space Mission Analysis and Design Workbook. Wiley J. Larson and James R. Wertz
Handbook of Geostationary Orbits. E. M. Soop
*Spacecrajt Structures and Mechanisms, From Coru:ept to Launch, Thomas P. Sarafm
Spaceflight Ll/e Support and Biospherics, Peter Eckart
*Reducing Space Mission Cost, James R. Wertz and Wiley J. Larson
The Logic ofMicrospace, Rick Fleeter
Space Marketing: A European Perspective, Walter A. R. Peeters
Fundamentals ofAstrodynamics and Applications, 2nd edition, David A. Vallado
Mission Geometry; Orbit and Constellation Design and Management, James R. Wertz
Influence ofPsychological Factors on Product Development, Eginaldo Shima Kamata
Essential Spaceflight Dynamics and Magnetospherlcs, Boris Rauschenbakh,
Michael Ovchinnikov, and Susan McKenna-lawlor
Space Psychology and Psychiatry, Nick Kanas and Dietrich Manuy .
Fundamentals ofSpace Medicine. Gilles Cl~ment
·A1so In the DoDINASA Space Technology Series (Managing EdItor Wiley J. Larson)

The Space Technology Library Editorial Board

Space Mission
Analysis and Design.
Third Edition
Edited by

Wiley J. Larson
United States Air Force Academy
and

James R. Wertz
Microcosm, Inc.
Coordination by

Douglas Kirkpatrick, United States Air Force Academy
Donna Klungle, Microcosm, Inc.
ThIs book is published as part of the Space Teclmology Series, a coopmtive activity of the

UDited Slates Department of Defeose. and National AeronaUlics and Space AdmiDistration.

Managing Editor: James R. Wertz. Microcosm, Iru:., E1 Segundo, CA
Editorial Board:

Val A. Chobotov, The Aerospace Corporation (retired)
MIchael L. DeLoreuzo, Uniled States Air Force Academy
Roland Dod,International Space University, Strasbourg, France
Robert B. Giffen, United States Air Force Academy (retired)
WOey J. Larson, United Stales Air Force Academy
Tom Logsdon, Rockwell International (retired)
Landis Markley, Goddard Space Flight Center
Robert G. Melton, Pennsylvania State University
Keiken Ninomfya, InstiJute ofSpace & Astronautical Scieru:e, Japan
Jebanglr J. Pocha, Marra Marconi Space, Stevenage, England
Malcolm D. Shuster, University of Florida
Gael Squibb, Jet Propulsion Laboratory
Martin Sweeting, University ofSU"ey, England

Space Technology Library
Published Jointly by

Microcosm Press
E1 Segundo, California

K1uwer Academic PubUsbers
Dordrecbt I Boston I London

Table of Contents
List of Authors

ThIrd Edition

Ix

Preface

Library of Congress CataJoging-in-PubUcation Data

1.

A C.I.P. Catalogue record for this book is available from
the Library of Congress.
ISBN 1-881883-10-8 (pb) (acid-free paper)
ISBN 0-7923-5901-1 (hb) (acid-free paper)
CUller photo ofEarth from Space: V'1eW of/ifrlca and the Inditm OceQII taken in Dec. 1972, by Apollo 17
the last ofthe Apollo mlssUms to explore the Moon. Photo courtesy ofNASA.
•

2.

CUller design by JeQlline Newcomb and Joy Saktzguchi.

Published jointly by

3.

Microcosm Press
401 Coral Circle, E1 Segundo, CA 90245-4622 USA

and
K1uwer Academic Publishers,
P.O. Box 17, 3300 AA Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
K1uwer Academic Publishers incorporates
the pubIishing programmes of
D. Reidel, Martinus Nijhoff, Dr_ W. Junk and MTP Press.
Sold and distributed in the USA and Canada
by Microcosm, Inc.
401 Coral Circle, El Segundo, CA 90245-4622 USA
and Kluwer Academic Publishers,
101 Philip Drive. Norwell. MA 02061 USA

4.

All Rights Reserved
<0 1m Mlcrccosm, Inc. and WJ. Larson
Seventh Printing, 200S
No part of the material protected by this copyright notice may be reproduced or
utilized In any form or by any means, eleetronic or mechanical
Inc~ding photocopying, recording, or by any information storage ~
relJieval system, without written permission from the copyright owner.
PrInted In the United Slates of Ametice

The Space MIssion Analysis and Design Process
1.1
Introduction and Overview
1.2 The Space Mission Life Cycle
1.3 Step 1: Definition of Mission Objectives
1.4 Step 2: Preliminary Estimate of Mission Needs, Requirements,
and Constraints

1
1
7
12

2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4

Mission Characterization
Step 3: Identifying Alternative Mission Concepts
Step 4: Identifying Alternative Mission Architectures
Step 5: Identifying System Drivers
Step 6: Characterizing the Mission Architecture

19
21
32
37
38

3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4

Mission Evaluation
Step 7: Identification of Critical Requirements
Mission Analysis
Step 8: Mission Utility
Step 9: Mission Concept Selection

47
48
49
59'
69

Requirements Definition
Role of ReqUirements in System Development
Requirements Analysis and Performance Budgeting
Requirements Documentation and Specifications
Summary: The Steps to a Requirements Baseline

73
74
80
90
93

4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4

5.

In all other countries, sold and distributed
by K1uwer Academic Publishers Group,
P.O. Box 322, 3300 AA Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Printed on acifJ-free paper

xvii

6.

15

Space MIssion Geometry
5.1
Introduction to Geometry on the Celestial Sphere
5.2 Earth Geometry Viewed from Space
5.3 Apparent Motion of Satellites for an Observer on the Earth
5.4 Development of Mapping and Pointing Budgets

95
98
110
117

Introduction to Astrodynamlcs
Keplerian Orbits
Orbit Perturbations
Orbit Maneuvering
Launch Windows
Orbit Maintenance

131

6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5

123

132
141
146
153
155

v

vill

21.

22.

23.

Table of Contents
Limits on Mission Design
21.1 Law and Policy Considerations
21.2 Orbital Debris-A Space Hazard

821

Design of Low-Cost Spacecraft
22.1 Designing Low-Cost Space Systems
22.2 Small Space Systems Capabilities and Applications
22.3 Applying Miniature Satellite Technology to FireSat
22.4 Scaling from Large to Small Systems
22.5 Economics of Low-Cost Space Systems
22.6 Annotated Bibliography on Low-Cost Space Systems

853

821
840

Applying th~ Space Mission Analysis and Design
23.1 Applymg SMAD to Later Mission Phases
23.2 Lessons Learned from Existing Space Programs
23.3 Future Trends

858
863
869
871
873
881

883
884
888
889

APPENDICES
Appendix A. Mass Di$tribution for Selected Satellites

894

Appendix B. Astronautical and Astrophysical Data

897

Appendix C. Elliptical Orbit Equations
Appendix D. Spherical Geometry
~ppendix E. Universal Time and Julian Dates

\ppendix F. Units and Conversion Factors
[ndex

902
904

913
919
929

NSIDE FRONT COVER
rundamental Physical Constants
'pace8ight Constants
ndex to Process Charts

Inside Front Cover
Inside Front Cover
Page Facing Inside Front Cover

NSIDE REAR COVER

:arth Satellite Parameters

Inside Rear Pages

List of Authors
Henry Apgar. Vice President, MCR International, Inc., Thousand Oaks, California.
M.B.A., Northeastern University; B.S. (Electrical Engineering), Rutgers University.
Chapter 2~ost Modeling.
David A. Bearden. Senior Project Engineer, Corporate Business Division, The Aerospace Corporation, El Segundo, California. Ph.D., M.S. (Aerospace Engineering),
University of Southern California; B.S. (Mechanical Engineering), University of
Utah. Chapter 20-Cost Modeling.
Robert Bell. Mission Analyst, Microcosm, Inc., Torrance, California. M.S. (Aerospace Engineering), University of Southern California; B.S. (Aerospace Engineering),
University of Southern California. Appendix F-Units and Conversion Factors.
Richard T.Berget. Program Director, BF Goodrich Aerospace, Data Systems Division, Albuquerque, New Mexico. M.S., B.S. (Electrical Engineering), University of.
New Mexico. Section 11.3-Command and Data Handling.
.
J. B. Blake. Director, Space Sciences Department, Space and Environment Technology Center, The Aerospace Corporation, El Segundo, California. Ph.D., M.S.
(physics), University of Illinois; B.S. (Engineering Physics), University of Illinois.
Section 8. I-The Space Environment.
Daryl G. Boden. Associate Professor of Aerospace Engineering, U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland. Ph.D.(Aeronautical and Astronautical Engineering),
University of Illinois; M.S. (Astronautical Engineering), Air Force Institute of
Technology; B.S. (Aerospace Engineering), University of Colorado. Chapter
6-Introduction to Astrodynamics.
.
William R. Britton. Mechanisms Section Manager, Space Systems, Lockheed Martin
Astronautics, Denver, Colorado. B.S. (Mechanical Engineering), Drexel University.
Section 11.6-Structures and Mechanisms.
Robert F. Brodsky. Chief Engineer, Microcosm, Inc., Torrance, California. Adjunct
Professor of Aerospace Engineering, University of Southern California. Sc.D.
(Engineering), New York University; M.Aeron. Engineering, New York University;
M.S. (Mathematics), University of New Mexico; B.M.E., Cornell University.
Chapter 9-Space Payload Design and Sizing.
John B. Carraway. Principal Engineer, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena,
California. B.S. (Electrical Engineering), Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Chapter 14-Mission Operations.

Ix

x

List of Authors

Bruce Chesley. Small Satellite Program Manager and Assistant Professor of Astronautics, U.S. Air Force Academy, Colorado Springs, Colorado. Ph.D. (Aerospace
En~n~ng), University o~ Colorado, Boulder; M.S. (Aerospace Engineering),
UruVerslty of Texas at Austin; B.S. (Aerospace Engineering), University of Notre
Dame. Chapter 9-Space Payload Design and Sizing.

Jo~ T: Collins.. Sy.stem Engineer, Microcosm, Inc. B.S. (Aerospace Engineering),
Uruverslty of illmOls (UIUC); B.S. (Astronomy), University of illinois (UIUC).
Section 20.5-FireSat Example.

Ric~ S. Davies. Technical Staff, Stanford Telecommunications, Inc., Santa Clara.
CaI!fo~a. Engineer, S~ford University; M.S., B.S. (Electrical Engineering),
UruVerslty ofPennsylvarua. Chapter I3-Communications Architecture.
Simon D. Dawson. Systems Engineer, Microcosm, Inc., Torrance, California. MSc
(S~ac~aft Technology and Satellite Communications), University College London,
Uruverslty o~Londo~; BSc (Hons) (Physics & EW'Opean Studies), University of Sussex. Appendices; InsIde Rear Pages-Earth Satellite Parameters.
Fred J. Dietrich. Principal Engineer, Globalstar, L.P., Palo Alto, California. Ph.D.,
Ohio ~tate University; M.S. (Electrical Engineering), Purdue University; B.S.
(Electncal Engineering), Missouri School of Mines. Chapter 13-Communications

Architecture.

Peter G. Doukas. Senior Staff Engineer, Martin Marietta Astronautics Group,
I?enver, Colorado. B.S. (Aeronautics and Astronautics), Purdue University. Section Il.~tructures and Mechanisms.
John S. Etemo. Chief Scientist, Ball Aerospace & Technologies Corp., Boulder,
Colorado. Ph.D., M.S. (Aeronautics and Astronautics), Massachusetts Institute of
Tec~ology; B.S. (Aerospace Engineering), Case Western Reserve University.
Section I I. I-Attitude Determination and Control.
Rick FIee~r. ~esident, AeroAstro,. Herndon, Virginia. Ph.D. (Thermodynamics),
Brown UnIVersIty; M.Sc. (Astronautics and Aeronautics), Stanford University; A.B.
(Engineering and Economics), Brown University. Chapter 22-Design of Low-Cost

Spacecraft·

David G. G~or~. Senior Engineering Specialist, The Aerospace Corporation, EI
Segundo, Callforma. B.S. (Mechanical Engineering), University of California. Irvine.
Section lIS-Thermal.
D. J •. Gorney. Principal ~~tor, Defense Support Program, The Aerospace CorPOT?bO~ EI Segundo. Callforma. Ph.D., M.S. (Atmospheric Sciences), University of
Callforma. Los Angeles; B.S. (physics), University of Bridgeport, Connecticut.
Section S.I-The Space Environment.
Eric W •.Grob. Aerospace Engineer, Thermal Engineering Branch, NASA Goddard
Sp~ce ~bght Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. M.S. (Mechanical Engineering), Drexel
Uruverslty; B.S. (Mechanical Engineering). West Virginia University. Section

11.5--Thermal.

1

List of Authors

xi

L. Jane Hansen. President, HRP Systems, Torrance, California. M.B.A., Pepperdine
University School of Business and Management; B.S. (Applied Mathematics), California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo. Chapter 16-Spacecraft Com-

puter Systems.
Brian E. Hardt Senior Project Engineer, The Aerospace Corporation, EI Segundo.
California. M.S. (Mechanical Engineering), University of D1inois at Urbana-Champaign; B.S. (Mechanical Engineering), University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Section lIS-Thermal.
Herbert Hecht. Chairman of the Board, SoHaR, Inc., Beverly Hills. California. Ph.D.
(Engineering), University of California. Los Angeles; M.S. (Electrical Engineering),
Polytechnic University of New York; B.S. (Electrical Engineering), City University,
New York. Section 19.2-Reliability for Space Mission Planning.
Robert W. Hosken. Member of the Technical Staff, The Aerospace Corporation, El
Segundo, California. Ph.D. (physics), University of illinois; B.S. (Electrical Engineering), Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn. Chapter I~pacecraft Computer

Systems.
Douglas Kirkpatrick. Visiting Professor, U.S. Air Force Academy, Colorado
Springs, Colorado. Ph.D., University of Texas at Austin; M.S., Purdue University;
B.S., U.S. Air Force Academy. Section 11.2-Telemetry, Tracking, and Command;
Chapter IS-Launch Systems.
Malcolm K. Kong. Manager, Hardness & Survivability Engineering, TRW Systems
& Information Technology Group. Redondo Beach, California. M.S. (Systems Engineering), West Coast University, Los Angeles; B.S. (Electrical Engineering), Purdue
University. Section S.2-Hardness and Survivability Requirements.
H. C. Koons. Distinguished Scientist, Space Sciences Department, Space and Environment Technology Center, The Aerospace Corporation, EI Segundo, California.
Ph.D. (Geophysics), Massachusetts Institute of Technology; B.S. (physics), Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Section S.I-The Space Environment.
Wiley J. Larson. Director, Space Mission Analysis and Design Program, U.S. Air
Force Academy, Colorado Springs, Colorado. D.E. (Spacecraft Design), Texas A&M
University; M.S. (Electrical Engineering), University of Michigan; B.S. (Electrical
Engineering), University of Michigan. Editor; Chapter I-The Space Mission Analysis and Design Process; Chapter 14-Mission Operations; Chapter 23-Applying

Space Mission ~nalysis and Design Process.
Joseph P.Loftus, Jr. Assistant Director for Plans, L.B. Johnson Space 'Center,
NASA,. Houston, Texas. Sloan Fellow (Business), Stanford University; M.A. (Math
and Psychology), Fordham University; B.A. (Math and Psychology), Catholic University. Chapter IS-Launch Systems.
Reinhold Lutz. Director, Technology Strategy, Daimler Chrysler Aerospace, Bergen,
Germany. Dr.-Ing., University of German Forces; Dipl.-Ing., Technical University
Munich. Chapter 9-Space Payload Design and Sizing.

xii

List of Authors

Ronald A. Madler. Associate Professor, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University,
Prescott, Arizona. Ph.D., M.S., B.S. (Aerospace Engineering Sciences), University of
Colorado, Boulder. Section 21.2-Drbital Debris-A Space Hazard.
James R. McCandless. Manager (Retired), Stress Analysis, Space Systems, Lockheed Martin Astronautics, Denver, Colorado. B.S. (ArchitecturaI Engineering),
University of Texas. Section 11.6-Structures and Mechanisms.
Joseph K. McDermott. Engineering Manager, Lockheed Martin Astronautics Group,
Denver, Colorado. M.E. (Engineering Management), University of Colorado; B.S.
(Chemistry), Loras College. Section 11.4-Power.

List of Authors

xiii

Richard P. Reinert. Staff Consultant, Spacecraft and Mission Design Division, Ball
Aerospace Systems, Boulder, Colorado. B.S: (~eronautica1 ~ngi~eering), Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Chapter 2-Mr.sszon Charactenzat;.on.
Robert L. Sackheim. Deputy Director, Propulsion Technology and. Fluid ~ec~cs
Center, .TRW, Inc., Redondo Beach, California. M.S., B.S. (ChelDlca1 Engmeenng)
Columbia University. Chapter 17-Space Propulsion Systems.
Thomas P. Sarafin. Co~ultantlPresident, Instar Engineering and .Co~ting, ~c.,
Littleton, Colorado. B.S. (Civil Engineering), Ohio State Umverslty. Section
11.6-Structures and Mechanisms.

Darren S. McKnight. Vice President, Titan Research and Technology, Reston, Virginia. Ph.D. (Aerospace Engineering), University of Colorado; M.S. (Mechanical
Engineering), University of New Mexico; B.S. (Engineering), U.S. Air Force Academy. Section 21.2-Orbital Debris-A Space Hazard.

Michael Schulz. Senior Scientist, Lockheed Martin Advanced Technology Center.
Palo Alto, California. Ph.D. (physics),lVIassachusetts Institute of.Technology; B.S.
(physics), Michigan State University. Section S.l-The Space EnVIronment.

Wade Molnau. Manufacturing Manager, Motorola Systems Solutions Group, Space
Services and Systems Division, Scottsdale, Arizona. Ph.D., M.S., B.S. (Industrial
Engineering), Arizona State University. Section 19.1- DeSigning Space Systems/or
Manu/acturability.

Cbad Spalt. Production Technical Lead, MotoR?la Satellite Comm~catio~ ~up,
Mobile Satellite Systems Division, Chandler, Arizona. M.S. (Industrial EngmeerIng),
Arizona State University; B.S. (Mechanical Engineering Technology), So~~ern
Dlinois University. Section 19. I-Designing Space Systems/or Manufacturabillty.

Paul Nordin. NASAlTDRS Resident Office Manager at Hughes Space and Communications, EI Segundo, California, employed by The Boeing Company, Seabrook,
MD. Ph.D.• M.A., B.A., (Nuclear Physics). University of California, Berkeley.
Section S.2-Hardness and Survivability Requirements.

Gael F. Sqw"hb. Director for TeleCommunications and Mission Operations: Jet
Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California. M.S. (Systems Management), Umversity of Southern California; B.S. (physics), Harvey Mudd College. Chapter
14--Mission Operations

Jean Olivieri. Teledesic Bus Production Manager. Motorola Advanced Systems
Division, Chandler, Arizona. M.S.• B.S. (Industrial Engineering), Arizona State
University. Section 19.1- Designing Space Systems for Manufacturability.

Charles Teixeira. Chief, Systems Definition Branch, L.B. Jo~n Space Ce~ter,
NASA, Houston, Texas. M.S. (Mechanical Engineering), LoUiSiana State Umversity; B.S. (Aeronautical Engineering), New York University. Chapter IS-Launch
Systems.

Wes Ousley. Head, Thermal Engineering Branch, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. B.S. (Mechanical Engineering), University of Maryland.
Section Il.S-Thermal.

Alan C. Tribble. Manager, Applications Development, ~orma~on ~echnology:
Rockwell Collins, Cedar Rapids, Iowa. Ph.D., M.S., (PhYSICS), Um~erslty of Iowa,
B.S. (physics), University of Arkansas. Section S.l-The Space EnvIronment.

Craig H. Pollock. Space Systems Engineer (Onboard Processing Design Integration
and Operations Engineering), TRW Space and Defense Sector, Redondo Beach California. M.A. (Mathematics), California State University, Long Beach; B.S. (physics
and Mathematics), University of New Mexico. Chapter 16-Spacecraft Computer
Systems.

A. L. Vampola. Consultant, Space Environment Eff~ts, Vista, Ca!ifornia. ~h.D.,
M.S. (physics), St Louis University; B.S. (Mathematics and PhYSICS), Creighton
University, Nebraska. Section S.l-The Space Environment.

Robert C. Prager. Engineering Specialist, The Aerospace Corporation, El Segundo,
California. MS. (Engineering), University of California, Berkeley. B.S. (Engineering), Princeton University. Section 1l.5-Thermal.

R. L. Walterscheid. Senior Scientist, Space Sciences Department, Space. and
Environment Technology Center, The Aerospace Corporation, EI Segundo, California. PhD. (Atmospheric Sciences), University of California, ~ Ang~les; .M.S.
(Meteorology). University of California, Los Ang~les; A.~. (Phrslcs), ~mverslty of
California, Berkeley; B.S. (Meteorology), UniVersity of WisconsIn. Section S.l-The
Space Environment.

Emery I. Reeves. Shriever Chair Professor of Space Systems Engineering, U.S. Air
Force Academy, Colorado Springs, Colorado. M.S. (Electrical Engineering),
':1assachusetts Institute of Technology; B.E. (Electrical Engineering), Yale Univer~Ity. Chapter IO-Spacecraft Design and Sizing, Chapter 12-Spacecraft Manu/acure and Test.

Stanley I. Weiss. Visiting Professor, Massachusetts ~tute .of Technology and
University of California Davis; Formerly Corporate ~ En1?neenng. an? VP Research
and Development, Lockheed Corporation; PhD., ~mverslty of ~~OIS; M.s., B.S.•
Renesselaer Polytechnic Institute. Chapter 4--RequJrements Definttton.

xiv

List of Authors

James R. Wertz. President, Microcosm, Inc., Torrance, California. Ph.D. (Relativity
& Cosmology), University of Texas, Austin; M.S. (Administration of Science
and Technology), George Washington University; S.B. (physics), Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. Editor; Chapter I-The Space Mission Analysis and Design
Process; Chapter 2-Mission Characterization; Chapter 3-Mission Evaluation;
Chapter 5-Space Mission Geometry; Chapter 7-0rbit and ConsteUation Design;
Section S.I-The Space Environment; Section 1l.7--Guidance and Navigation;
Chapter 2~Applying the Space Mission Analysis and Design Process; Appendix E-Universal Time and Julian Dates.
Gary G. Whitworth. Senior Engineer (Retired), Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns
Hopkins University, Laurel, Maryland. B.S. (Electrical Engineering), University of
Tennessee. Chapter 15-Ground System Design and Sizing.
Michael S. Williams. Vice President, Personal SATCOM Systems, Lockheed Martin
Global Telecommunications, Reston, VA. M.S. (Electrical Engineering), University
of Pennsylvania; M.B.A. (Statistics/Operations Research), Temple University; B.S.
(Physics), St Joseph's University. Chapter 4-Requirements Definition.

William B. Wirln. General Manager, Wirin & Associates. 1.D. (University of
Southern California School of Law); B.A. (political Science), Occidental College.
Section 21.1-Law and Policy Considerations.
Robert E. Wong. Manager, Economic Analysis, TRW Systems Engineering and
Development Division. TRW, Inc., Redondo Beach, California. PhD. (Economics),
University of Southern California; M.S. (Mathematics), University of Southern
California; M.A. (Economics), University of Southern California; B.S. (Physics),
Iowa State University. Chapter 2O--Cost Modeling.
Sidney Zafran. Program Manager, TRW, Inc., Redondo Beach, California. B.S.
(Mechanical Engineering), Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Chapter 17Space Propulsion Systems.

List of Authors

xv

SMAD I, ll, and m Authors
The third edition is the end result of a substantial effort by the authors of all the
SMAD editions. Consequently, we would like to acknowledge and express our thanks
to alI of the authors who have contributed to this series:
Henry Apgar
David A. Bearden
Robert Bell
Richard T. Berget
J. B. Blake
James E. Boatwright
Daryl G. Boden
William R. Britton
Robert F. Brodsky
John B. Carraway
Bruce Chesley
Arthur Chomas
John T. Collins
Richard S. Davies
Simon D. Dawson
Fred 1. Dietrich
Peter G. Doukas
Neal Ely
John S. Etemo
Rick Fleeter
John R. Ford, Jr.
Martin E.B. France
. David G. Gilmore
Steven Glaseman
D.J.Gorney
EricW.Grob
L. Jane Hansen
Brian E. Hardt
Herbert Hecht
Robert W. Hosken
Douglas Kirkpatrick
Malcolm K. Kong
H. C. Koons
Wiley J. Larson
Joseph P. Loftus, Jr.
Reinhold Lutz
Ronald A. Madler
Fr~ois Martel

James R. McCandless
Joseph K. McDermott
Darren S. McKnight
Robert K. McMor4ie
Wade Molnau
Ralph L. Mueller
David Negron, Jr.
Paul Nordin
Thomas P. O'Brien
Jean Olivieri
Wes Ousley
Aniceto Panetti
Craig H. Pollock
Robert C. Prager
Emery I. Reeves
Richard P. Reinert
Robert L. Sackheim
Thomas P. Sarafin
Michael Schulz
ChadSpalt
Gael F. Squibb
Charles Teixeira
Merlin E. Thimlar
Alan C. Tribble
Tim Tumer
A. L. Vampola
R. L. Walterscheid
Richard Warner .
Stanley I. Weiss
James R. Wertz
Gary G. Whitworth
Michael S. Williams
William B. Wirin
Robert S. Wolf
RobertE. Wong
Sidney Zafran
Robert O. Zennuehlen
Harold F. Zimbelman

1
I

Preface
.Space. Mission AruJIysis and Design, known as SMAD to its many friends, has
gamed WIdespread use as a text and reference throughout the astronautics community.
The pwpose of the third edition of SMAD is to both update the book and make it more
useful and more practical wherever possible. Some topics, such as astrodynamics and
mission geometry, have changed relatively little since pUblication of the second edition in 1992. Here we have made minor modifications to make the material clearer and
more pr~. On the other hand, topics such as space computers and the design of
?bserva~o~ p~yloads ,~ave been nearly co~letely rewritten. Because of the growing
Interest In 'LightSats and low-Earth OrbIt constellations we have added a Small,sat
cost model, expanded the discussion of constellation design, and included a new section on multi-satellite manufacturing. The entire volume reflects a greater emphasis on
reducing mission cos~ ~d doing more with less people and fewer resources." Fmally,
the FIreSat sample mISSIon has been extended further and the appendices and end matter updated and expanded to provide greater utility as a quick reference. We hope the
new edition is better and more useful to you.
As with the first two editions, the goal of the book to is allow you to begin with a
"blank sheet of paper" and design a space mission to meet a set of broad, often poorly
defined, objectives at minimum cost and risk. You should be able to define the mission
in sufficient detail to identify principal drivers and make a preliminary assessment of
overall performance, size, cost, and risk. The emphasis is on low-Earth orbit, unmanned sp~ However, we .hope the principles are broad enough to be applicable to ~ther mI~IOnS as well. We Intend the book to be a practical guide, rather than a
theoretical treatise. As much as possible, we have provided physical and engineering
data, rules of thumb, empirical formulas, and design algorithms based on past experience. We assume that the reader has a general knowledge of physics, math, and basic
engineering, but is not necessarily familiar with any aspect of space technology.
The ~ edition represents an amalgam of contributions over the last decade by
m~y engIneers.and m~agers ~m throughout the community. It reflects the insight
gamed from theIr practical expenence, and suggests how things might be done better
in the future. From time to time the views of authors and editors conflict, as must necessarily ~~ gi~en the broad diversity of experience. We believe it is important to
reflect this diversIty rather than suppress the opinions of individual experts. Similarly,
the level of treatment varies among topics, depending both on the issues each author
feels is critical and our overall assessment of the level of detail in each topic that is
important to the preliminary mission analysis and design process.

• The continuing. unrelenting demand to drive down mission cost has led to the creation a
companion volume to SMAD, RedUCing Space Mission Cost [Wertz and Larson, 1996] which
addresses cost reduction in all aspects of mission design and includes 10 case studies ~f how
the process works in practice.

xvi

Preface

xvii

The book is intended as a textbook for either introductory graduate or advanced
undergraduate courses, or as a reference for those already working in space technology. It can also provide valuable supplementary material for related courses such
as spacecraft design or space mission operations. We believe the book can be a key
tool for payload designers who need to find out more about space mission design and
for those charged with the responsibility of developing space mission requirements
and specifications. Fmally, we hope that it will be of use to many system engineers in
this field who have a detailed knowledge of one area, but need to broaden their .,ackground or verify their understanding in related topics.
The book is meant to be read sequentially, although most of the chapters are selfcontained, with references to other parts of the book as needed. For readers with
specific interests, we recommend the following:
• Those concerned primarily with mission analysis and design should read
Chaps. 1-9 and 19-23.
• Those concerned with spacecraft and subsystem design should read Chaps. 1,
2, 4,8-13, and 16-23.
• Those concerned primarily with mission operations and the ground interaction
should read Chaps. 1,2,4, and 13-16.
• Those concerned with requirements definition, logistics, and putting a space
system in place should read Chaps. 1-4,7,9, 10, and 18-23.
• Those interested in constellation design and multi-satellite systems should
read Chaps. 1-9, 13-16, and 19-23.
• Those interested in reducing mission cost and the design of low-cost missions
should read Chaps. 1-3,7-10,12,20-23, and the companion volume, Reducing Space Mission Cost.
SI (metric) units are used throughout the book. Conversions for essentially all
common units are contained in Appendix F. Conversion factors and physical constants
are generally given to their full available accuracy so that they can be inserted into
computer programs and not considered further. As discussed in the introduction to the
appendices, the values given are those adopted by the National Bureau of Standards
based on a least-squares fit to the fundamental physical constants or international
agreement on the defInitions of various units. In the case of astronomical constants,
values adopted by the International Astronomical Union are given. The most commonly used astronautical formulas and constants are in the appendices. An expanded
table of space mission parameters for Earth orbits is on the inside back endleaf. For
those wishing to expand that table or use it for other central bodies, the formulas used
for creating it are on the preceding pages.
Leadership, funding, and support essential to updating the book were provided by
numerous programs at the Air Force Space and Missile Center, Air Force Space
Command, NASA Headquarters, NASNGoddard Space Flight Center, and the
Advanced Projects Research Agency. Obtaining funding to create and maintain
much-needed reference material is exceptionally difficult. We are deeply indebted to
the sponsoring organizations, particularly Air Force Phillips Laboratory, for their
support and their recognition of the importance of projects such as this one.
The third edition of this book is the result of nearly two years of effort by a
dedicated team of government, industry, and academic professionals. The Department
of Astronautics, United States Air Force Academy, provided unwavering support for

Preface

Preface

the project. Michael DeLorenzo, Chairman of the Department of Astronautics,
provided the leadership and continuing support critical to projects of this type. Both
Doug Kirkpatrick and Perry Luckett performed a detailed grammatical review in a
valiant effort to prevent the rest of us from demonstrating why we became engineers
rather than writers. Several graphics artists at the Academy, particularly Mary
Tostanoski and Debra Porter, spent many hours developing and updating artwork.
Joan Aug and Bert Reinertson cheerfully handled the huge administrative burden at
the Academy. Numerous faculty members, staff, and students graciously sacrificed
their time to provide assistance, review, and comments. Daryl Boden assisted with the
editing and reviewing even after changing assignments to the Naval Academy. Doug
Kirkpatrick managed the task for the Air Force with great skill and patience and
reviewed nearly all of the material for both technical and linguistic correctness!
OAO Corporation, Colorado Springs, Colorado, provided the contract support for
the project. Anita Shute at the Air Force Academy spent many hours revising drafts,
creating artwork, and working all aspects of the project. Eugene deGeus Of Kluwer
Academic Publishers supplied substantial assistance with all aspects of the publishing
activity. This was his final project at Kluwer before taking a science administration
position with the Dutch government. We will miss his wisdom and guidance and wish
him the best of future success.
At Microcosm, the entire analysis and publications staff worked virtually all
aspects of the book (art, grammar, equation checking, technical reviews, and cameraready copy) and suffered patiently through ''the book project" as it continually
absorbed great amounts of limited resources. Much of the new graphics was done by
undergraduate students Karen Burnham. Paul Murata, Alan Chen, and Julie Wertz
under the very capable guidance of Kevin Polk and Simon Dawson. Jennifer Burnham
and Judith Neiger did much of the proofing. Robert Bell did most of the demanding
task of updating units and conversion factors. John Collins created the new FueSat
cost model. Wendi Huntzicker and Joy Sakaguchi created the new camera-ready copy
for most of the book. Joy and Chris deFelippo did much of the new art. Fmally, Donna
Klungle did a truly remarkable job managing, administering, editing, reviewing, and
preparing revisions, drafts, and the final camera-ready copy. Donna accomplished this
with skill and good humor, while dealing with the conflicting demands of multiple authors and editors.
Arthur Cox of Lawrence Livermore National Labs and the editors of Astrophysical
Quantities [1999] graciously permitted the use of drafts of their forthcoming volume
so that we could obtain the most current values for physical quantities. We highly
recommend that readers consult Astrophysical Quantities for solar system and astronomical parameters which are not contained here.
.
Every effort has been made to eliminate mathematical and factua1 errors. Many
errors from prior editions have been found largely through readers' comments and
constructive criticism. Please continue to send any errors, omissions, corrections, or
comments to either editor at the addresses below. We sincerely hope that the book will
be of use to you in our common goal of reducing the cost and complexity of space
utilization.
Fmally, one of the most exciting aspects of space mission analysis and design is that
after 40 years of space exploration we have only begun to scratch the surface of the
variety of important inissions that can and should be done. In spite of problems, setbacks, and higher costs than any of us would like, people young and old remain excited
about space. The exploration of space will take dramatic new turns in the future, from

communications constellations and microgravity work now beginning to become a
reality to solar power satellites, space tourism, space ind~t:rililization, and settlements
on the Moon and planets which are .still to be designed. We hope that this volume
provides a portion of the roadmap and incentive to those who will undertake these·
tasks. We wish you the best of success in this endeavor.
June, 1999
JamesR. Wertz
Microcosm, Inc.
401 Coral Circle
EI Segundo, CA 90245-4622
FAX: (310) 726-4110
jwertz@smad.com

Wiley J. Larson
Department of Astronautics
United States Air Force Academy
Colorado Springs, CO 80840-6224
FAX: (719) 333-3723
wileylarson@adelphia.net

Cox, A.N. ed. 1999. Astrophysical Quantities, New York: Springer-Verlag..
Wertz, James R. and Wiley J. Larson. 1996. Reducing Space Mission Cost. Tonance, CA and
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Microcosm Press and lOuwer Academic Publishers.

Chapter 1
The Space Mission Analysis and Design Process
James R. Wertz, Microcosm, Inc.
Wiley J. Larson, Unued States Air Force Academy
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4

Introduction and Overview
The Space Mission Life Cycle
Step 1: Definition of Mission Objectives
Step 2: Preliminary Estimate of Mission Needs,
Requirements, and Constraints

Space mission analysis and design begins with one or more broad objectives and
constraints and then proceeds to define a space system that will meet them at the
lowest possible cost. Broad objectives and constraints are the key to this process.
Procurement plans for space systems too often substitute detailed numerical requirements for broad mission objectives. To get the most performance for the money spent.
we must require of the system only what it can reasonably achieve. Thus, while our
overall objectives to communicate, navigate, or observe will generally remain the
same, we will achieve these objectives .differently as technology and our understanding of the process and problem evolve. This chapter summarizes, and the book as a
whole details, this process of defining and refining both what is to be done and what
mission concept will do it at the lowest cost.
There are now a number of references available on the mission design process and
the definition of mission objectives. Rechtin [1991] and Ruskin and Estes [1995]
provide general discussions "fthis process. Shishko [1995] provides an overview from
the NASA perspective and Przemieniecki [1993] gives a similar treatment for defense
missions. Davidoff [1998] and Wertz and Larson [1996] discuss this process from the
perspective of very low-cost missions and methods for dramatically reducing mission
cost. respectively. Boden and Larson [1996] discuss the analysis and design process
specifically .for mission operations. Fmally, Kay [1995] examines the fundamental
difficulty of doing technical trades within a democratic political environment.

1.1 bitroduction and Overview
Table 1-1 summarizes our approach to the space mission analysis and design
process. Space missions range widely from communications, to planetary explomtion,
to proposals for space manufacturing, to burial in space. No single process can fully

cover all contingencies, but the method in Table 1-1 summarizes a pmctical approach
evolved over the first 40 years of space exploration.

2

The Space Mission Analysis and Design Process

1.1

Space is expensive. Cost is a fundamental limitation to nearly all space missions
and is becoming more so. Consequently, this and subsequent tables reflect the assessment of each author on how things traditionally have been done and how they should
be done differently, both to lower cost and to achieve the greatest retWll from the space
invesbnent
Analysis and design are iterative, gradWUIy refining both the requirements and
methods of achieving them. Thus, we must repeat the broad process defined in
Table 1-1 many times for each mission. The first several iterations may take only a
day, but more detailed assessments will take far longer.
Successive iterations through Table 1-1 will usually lead to a more detailed, betterdefined space mission concept But we must still retWll regularly to the broad mission
objectives and search for ways to achieve them at a lower cost In defining and refining
the approach, there is strong pressure to proceed to ever greater detail, and never revise
a decision once it has been made. Although we must maintain orderly progress, we
must also review the mission design regularly for better ways to achieve the mission
objectives. Methods may change as a result of evolving technology, a new understanding of the problem, or simply fresh ideas and approaches as more individuals become
involved.
TABLE 1-1. The Space MIssIon AnalysIs and DesIgn (SMAD) Process. Tables of this type
appear throughout the book. The far right column refers to sections In the book that
give details of each step. See text for further explanation.
TypIcal
Flow

~+

Step
DefIne
Ob}ecUves

+

~+

Characterize
the MIssIon

{
{

1--+
1--+
+ Evaluate {
1--+ the MissIon
1--+
DefIne
{
1--+ Requlrernente

1. Define broad objectives and constraints
2. EstImate quantitative mission needs and
requirements

SectIon
1.3
1.4

.""""--.......

2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4

7. identify critical requirements
8. Evaluate mission utIlIly
9. DefIne mission concept (baseline)

3.1
3.3
3.4

4. DelIne alternative mission architectures
5. Identify system drivers for each
6. Characterize mission concepts and
architectures

10. DelIne system requirements
11. Allocate requirements to system elements

4.1
4.2-4.4

Fmally, we must document the results of this iterative process. If we wish to go
back and reexamine decisions as new data becomes available, we must clearly understand and convey to others the reasons for each decision. We need this documentation
for decisions based on detailed technical analyses, and, equally important, for those
based on simplicity, ease of assessment, or political considerations.
This book presents many examples from real space missions. To illustrate the
mission analysis and design process without being tied to existing space systems, we
invented the hypothetical FireSat space mission. Figure 1-1 shows the broad mission
statement we used to begin the process of space mission design for FrreSat We wish

1.1

Introduction and Overview

3

to stress that the parameters developed throughout the book are by no means the only
possible set for FrreSat, nor necessarily the best. To show how solutions may vary,
Chap. 22 presents a very low-cost spacecraft as an alternative for FrreSat. Our example
system simply illustrates the iterative process of space mission analysis and design'.
Different assumptions, requirements, or proposed solutions may lead to dramatically
different results.
F1reSat
Mission Statement
Because forest fires have an IncreaSing Impact on recreation and
commerce and ever higher public visibility, the United States needs a
more effective system to Identify and monitor them. In addition, It would
be desirable (but not required) to monitor forest fires for other nations;
collect statistical data on fire outbreaks, spread, speed, and duration; and
provide other forest management data.
Ultimately, the Forest Service's fire-monitoring office and rangers In the
field will use the data. Data flow and formats must meet the needs of both
groups without specialized training and must allow them to respond
promptly to changing conditions.
FIg. 1-1.

OrIgin of the Hypothetical FlreSat Mission. F1reSat Is used as the primary example
throughout this book.
.

To illustrate the broad process of Table 1-1, we will go through each of the toplevel steps for the FrreSat mission and indicate the type of information that needs to be
developed:
In Step 1, we define what the mission needs to achieve. What are our quaIitative
goals, and why? This information should come largely from the mission statement of
Fig. 1-1. We need to retWll to this broad goal over and over to ask whether we are
doing what we set out to do.
Step 2 is significantly different It quantifies how well we wish to achieve the
broad objectives, given our needs, applicable technology, and cost constraints. These
quantitative requirements should be subject to trade as we go along. A major error in
many space-system procurements is to set requirements in concrete at a relatively
early stage. An example for FrreSat might be a 100 m positioning accuracy for initial
fire detection. A 100 m requirement seems to be a reasonable place to start, but
compared to an accuracy of 200 m, it could add tens or even hundreds of millions of
dollars to the overall system cost. We might spend this extra money better in acquiring
fire detection airplanes, providing more personnel on the ground, or using better firefighting technology. Congress, the Deparbnent of the Interior, and the Forest Service
must ultimately decide how well FrreSat should do and at what cost. Space mission
analysis and design provides the quantitative data needed to support such decisions.
Our next step is to define and characterize a space mission to meet the objectives.
Step 3 begins this process by developing alternative mission concepts. A mission
concept or concept ofoperations is a broad statement of how the mission will work in
practice. It includes issues such as how the data will be sensed and delivered to the end
user, how the mission will be controlled, and the overall mission timeline. Alternative
mission concepts include, for example, conceptually distinct approaches to the problem such as the very low-cost approach defined in Chap. 22. These would also include

4

The Space Mission Analysis and Design Process

1.1

different orbits or different wavelength bands for fire detection that would require
dramatically dissimilar systems.
Step 4 defines alternate combinations of mission elements or the space mission
architecture to. meet the requirements of the mission concept. The space mission
architecture is the mission concept plus a definition of each of the elements of the
mission shown in Fig. 1-3 (Sec. 1.2). A good way to begin Step 4 is to look at the
mission elements in Fig. 1-3 and consider what alternatives for each of them would
best meet mission objectives.
In any real system, many things influence overall cost, performance, or the design
of detailed components. However, these are influenced mainly by a relatively small
number of key parameters or components, called drivers. Thus, there may be cost,
performance, or system drivers which affect the design of the overall space system. In
Step 5 we identify the principal cost and performance drivers for each alternative
mission concept. For most space missions, system drivers include the number of
satellites, altitude, power, and instrument size and weight. (Sec. 2.3 gives a more
detailed 1ist.) By explicitly identifying the system drivers, we can concentrate our
effort on parameters having the most impact on the design and therefore on the cost of
the space mission. This method improves our chances of getting the best possible
design within the available budget.
Step 6 is typically the most involved in mission design because it defines in detail
what the system is and does. Here we determine the power, weight, and pointing
budgets" and decide what to process on the ground or in space. Characterizing the
mission is the most costly step because it requires the expertise of many people.
Developing detail is always comforting in managing any design process but, as noted
earlier, we must take care not to overdo details while characterizing the mission.
System-level requirements and trades must remain our primary focus.
The next step in mission analysis and design is to evaluate the systems we have
defined. Having defined and characterized alternative mission concepts, we return in
Step 7 to our initial quantitative requirements and identify the critical requirements, t
that is, the key requirements principally responsible for determining the cost and
complexity of the system. Recall that the system drivers are those defining parameters,
such as altitude or payload aperture, which most strongly affect the cost, performance,
and system design. System drivers are not normally system requirements. However, a
critical requirement for covemge or resolution may result in altitude and aperture
becoming performance or system drivers. The implication of this for mission analysis
and design is that we must put substantial effort into understanding the quantitative
relationship between, for example, altitude, aperture, covemge, and resolution, in
order to set intelligently both the requirements (covemge and resolution) and system
pammeters (altitude and aperture). For FtreSat, the critical requirements might be fire
location accumcy, resolution, coverage, or timeliness of the data. We should concentrate on these requirements to determine how firm they are, how good we should make
them, and how much we will pay for them to achieve our broad objectives. Critical
requirements may differ for alternative mission concepts.
• A budget is a numerical list of the components of any overall system parameter. Thus, the total
spacecraft weight budget would consist of the weights assigned to the payload instruments,
the various subsystems, the propellant required, and typically some margin for growth.
t In the first and second editions of this book, critical requirements were called driving requirements. We changed the terminology to avoid confusion with the system drivers of Step 5.

Introduction and Overview

5

The above questions form the basis of mission utility analysis, Step 8, in which we
quantify how well we are meeting both the requirements and the broad objectives as a
function of either cost or key system-design choices. We would like to provide the
decision maker a single chart of potential performance vs. cost. More typically, we
must settle for something less ideal, such as the percent of fires detected within 2 hours
vs. the aperture of the instrument, or the delay time in detecting forest fires vs. altitude
and the number of satellites in the constellation. Only the user or developer of the system can ultimately determine the goodness of these critical performance measures,
called Measures o/Effectiveness or Figures o/Merit. Consequently, mission definition
must be to some degree a joint process between those who understand the mission
analysis and design process and those who eventually must use the system or justify
its cost.
Having evaluated alternative designs and done a preliminary assessment of mission
utility, we select one or more baseline system designs in Step 9. A baseline design is
a single consistent definition of the system which meets most or all of the mission
objectives. A consistent system definition is a single set of values for all of the system
pammeters which fit with each other-e.g., resolution and covemge mtes which correspond to the assigned altitude, aperture, and resulting spacecraft weight. In actually
designing a space system, many parameters are being defmed and changed simultaneously. The baseline provides a tempomry milestone against which to measure
progress. It also allows us to limit the number of options which must be evaluated.
Rather than looking at all possible combinations of altitude, aperture, power, and
spectral band (a nearly impossible task), it is much more feasible to look at the impact
of varying each of these individually relative to one or two baseline designs. As the
system design matures, the baseline becomes more firm, and eventually becomes the
system design. However, we should always remember that the baseline is only a starting point for the itemtive trade process and should not be regarded as an ironclad
definition of mission pammeters.
Because builders of a space system work from specific requirements, we must
translate the broad objectives and constraints of the mission into well-defined system
requirements in Step 10. In Step 11, we flow down or allocate these numerical
requirements to the components of the overall space mission in the same way that a
budget allocates weight and power to the spacecraft's components. The final list of
detailed requirements reflects how well we have done the job of space mission
analysis, design, and allocation.

1.1.1 Changes in Fnture Space Missions
The way we analyze and design space missions is itself continually evolving. In
particular, we expect major changes in this process because of increasing technological maturity, increasing use of onboard processing, and continuing emphasis on
low-cost missions.
Technological limits on space explomtion are giving way to those of policies,
politics, and economics. Nearly any mission is technically feasible. It is well within
our technical capacity to build a lunar base, mount manned explomtions to Mars or
other planets, create an industrial base in space, or build networks of satellites to
provide truly global communications and observations. Our activity in space depends
on what we can afford to do or what we choose to do. Therefore, we must carefully
analyze why we choose to use or explore space. We must select each space mission,
not just to achieve something that could not have been done before, but to achieve
something that should be done or is worth doing.

6

The Space Mission Analysis and Design Process

1.1

A major technological change in future space missions will be increased use of
onboard computers. Space system developers have been very slow to use computers
because of the conservative approach to spacecraft design, long lead times in spacecraft production, and very real difficulties associated with running a computer reliably
in space.· The shift to increased onboard processing is moving spacecraft toward more
autonomy and increased complexity in terms of the tasks they undertake. Whether this
change drives space costs up or down depends upon the government and industry's
approach to autonomy and software development for space. Spacecraft may follow the
example of ground systems, carrying either low-cost commercial systems or vastly
more expensive but more capable special purpose systems.
We anticipate continuing emphasis on low-cost spacecraft. Small spacecraft will
increase for future space missions. These could be either individual, single-pmpose,
small satellites or large constellations of smaI1 satellites used for communications,
space-based radar, or tactical applications. Again, the community appears to be dividing into those who can build smaI1, low-cost spacecraft and those who continue to
build large, expensive systems. Creating LightSats represents a new ethic and a new
way of doing business in space. If the space business is to grow and prosper as commercial aviation has, we must find a way to reduce the costs of using space. Lowering
cost is the real challenge for space mission analysis and design, as well as the govemment and industrial groups which have created and used this process.
Fmally, the mission' concept and associated space mission architecture largely
determine the cost, complexity, and efficiency of the overall system, This is compounded greatly when you begin to consider integrating the operational aspects of
many different missions. For example, today within DoD, we have communication,
navigation, signal intelligence, reconnaissance, and weather systems; each with their
own mission concept and architecture. The upcoming challenge is to find ways for
these systems to operate together to meet user needs.
The fundamental question is ''Who are the customers, and what products or services
do they require?" In trying to answer this we find ourselves dealing with informationrelated issues: What information is required, Where, and in what form? Most
customers don't care about the existence of communications, navigation, or weather
satellites. They need specific information and are not interested in what systems
provide it Today's challenge is to blend the capabilities and information available
from multiple systems to meet customer needs. Military people often express this as
tasking, processing, interpretation, and dissemination, whereas commercial people
often express the same issues as customer requests processing, formatting, and
delivery.
Figure 1-3 is divided along somewhat arbitrary, functional boundaries. We need to,
find ways to dissolve theSe artificial boundaries and create cost-effective solutions to
our customer's information needs. For example, instead of trying to integrate the
separate systems discussed above, we might consider having multimission payloads
and spacecraft that have the ability to gather intelligence information, weather, and
provide navigation using one payload-multimission payloads.
An alternative to creating multimission payloads is to divide the architecture
differently by placing all sensors on one space asset, processing capability on another
• Space computers are far more susceptible than ground computers to single-evenl upsets caused
by the bigh-radiation environment or randomly occurring cosmic rays. To protect against this
damage, we must design computers specifically for use in space, as described in Chap. 16.

The Space Mission Life Cycle

1.2

7

and using existing or proposed communications links to move the information around.
A third alternative might be to use a series of low-cost LightSats each doing a separate
function, but in such a way that the end results can be easily and directly integrated by
the user's equipment on the grpund.
These examples provide a slightly different perspective which is difficult for many
organizations, both industrial and government, to adopt because we think and organize
functionally-launch, spacecraft, operations, and so on. Being able to functionally
decompose our missions and divide them into workable pieces has been one of the
reasons, for our success. On the other hand, if we think only functionally it may cause
significant problems. We must also think horizontally and create systems that can be
integrated with other space and ground systems to create capabilities that are greater
than the sum of their parts. As always, our goal is to meet the total user needs at
minimum cost and risk.

1.2 The Space Mission Life Cycle
Table 1-2 illustrates the life cycle of a space mission, which typically progresses
through four phases:,
• Concept exploration, the initial study phase, which results in a broad definition

of the space mission and its components.
• Detailed development, the formal design phase, which reswts in a detailed
definition of the system components and, in larger programs, development of

test hardware or software.
• Production and deployment, the construction of the ground and flight hardware and software and launch of the first full constellation of satellites.
• Operations and support, the day-ta-day operation of the space system, its
maintenance and support, and finally its deorbit or recovery at the end of the

mission life.
These phases may be divided and named differently depending on whether the
sponso1'-the group which provides and controls the program budget-is DoD,

NASA, one of the many international organizations, or a commercial enterprise. The
time required to progress from initial concept to deorbiting or death of the space asset
appears to be independent of the sponsor. Large, complex space missions typically
require 10 to 15 years to develop and operate from 5 to 15 years, whereas small,
relatively simple missions require as few as 12 to 18 months to develop and operate
for 6 months to several years.
Procurement and operating policies and procedures vary with the sponsoring
organization, but the key players are the same: the space mission operator, end user or
customer, and developer. Commercial space missions are customer driven. The main
difference between users and customers is that customers usua1ly pay for a service,
whereas users receive services that others pay for. Operators control and maintain the
space and ground assets, and are typically applied engineering organizations. End
users receive and use the products and capability of the space mission. They include
astronomers and physicists for science missions, meteorologists for weather missions.
you and me for communication and navigation missions, geologists and agronomists
for Earth resources missions, and the war fighter for offensive and defensive military

8

The Space Mission Analysis and Design Process

1.2

TABLE 1-2. Space Program Development Phases. Every space program progresses through
the top-level phases. Subphases may or may nolbe paJtm a given pr~ram. The
time required to complete the process varies with the scope. (Diagram courtesy
R. Bertrand.)

p~

The Space Mission Life Cycle

Concept Exploration

Detailed Development

SRR

.. p,. . A B
~ PhaSe-A Preliminary· Definition
0( Advanced AnaJy$ls·
Z Sfudles

C
DesIgn

CDR

MG:R
,

,

SAR

FRR OI!R

DR:

II:
Engl~rlngand

Production

DevelOpment .

Deployment

MaI'IIifacturing

SDR PDR:

~

0
~

V

11-

AR
CDR

DoDMDestone
Major Review (Control Gate)
RevIew
Launch
Acceptance Review
CritICal Dealgn Review

DR
FRR
MCR
MDR
ORR
PDR

CDR

and

,

Decommissioning RevIew
FIlght Readiness Review
MIssion Concept Review
MIssion DefinItIon RevIew
Operational Readiness
Review
PreIlmInaJy Dealgn Review

PRR Preliminary Requlremen1s
Review
QR QuaDftcation Review
SAR System Acceptance Review
SDR System DefinItIon Review
SRR System Requlremen1s
Review

space missions. The developer is the procuring agent, be it government or a commercial enterprise, and includes the contractors, subcontractors, and government development, and test organizations. The operators and users must generate technically and
fiscally responsible requirements; the developer must provide the necessary product
or capability on time and .within changing political and funding constraints.
Three basic activities occur during the Concept Exploration Phase (see Fig. 1-2).
Users and operators develop and coordinate a set of broad needs and performance
objectives based on an overall concept of operations. At the same time. developers
generate alternative concepts to meet the perceived needs of the user and operating
community. In addition. the sponsor performs long-range planning. develops an
overall program structure, and estimates budgetary needs and available funding to
meet the needs of the users. operators, and developers. In order to be successful in pr0ducing and deploying a new space capability. the four key players in this activity must
closely integrate their areas of responsibility.
This book emphasizes the concept exploration phase which further divides into
needs analysis and concept development, as detailed in Table 1-3. The goal during
concept exploration is to assess the need for a space mission and to develop affordable
alternatives that meet operator and end-user requirements. The Needs Analysis is a

Rg. 1-2. OrganlzaUons and People that Play Key Roles In Space Missions. During concept
exploration users and operators provide requirements, developers create the design of
the mission and systems, while sponsors provide funding.

continuing process which culminates in a new program start. Operators and end users
develop potential mission requirements based on the considerations shown in the lefthand column of Table 1-3. The process is different for each organization, but at some
point a new program begins with a set of mission objectives. concept of operations,
and desired schedule. In DoD, the Mission Needs Statement documents this information and becomes part of the planning, programming, and budgeting system [Defense
Systems Management College. 1990]. If approved, the program receives funding and
proceeds to concept development
.
At the Program Initiation milestone, the funding organization commits to pr0ceeding through concept development. The program will receive different levels of
scrutiny depending on its scope, political interest, and funding requirements. In DoD.
programs classed as major programs receive the utmost attention at the highest levels
of the Defense Department. Various components of the military use distinct criteria to
identify major programs [Defense Systems Management College. 1990]. A DoD critical requirements program is "major" if it requires more than $200 million in research.
development, test, and evaluation funds or more than $1 billion in production costs.
Programs that require participation by more than one component of the anned forces
or have congressional interest may also be classified as major programs.
During Concept Development the developer must generate alternative methods of
meeting the operator's and end user's needs. This procedure includes developing and
assessing different concepts and components for mission operations. as well as

10

The Space Mission ADalysis and Design Process

1.2

The Space Mission Life Cycle

1.2

11

TABLE 1-3. Further Breakdown of Concept exploration Phase. During concept exploration
the operator and end users define their needs and requirements and pass them to
the developing organization for concept development. A basic premise of this book
Is that the operator, user, and developer should work together to create realistic and
affordable mission objectives and requirements that meet user needs.
Concept exploration and DefInition
Needs Analysis

Generate potential requirements based on
Mission objectives
Concept of operations
Schedule
Ufe-cycle cost and affordabllity
Changing marketplace
Research needs
National space policy
Long-range plan for space
Changing threats to netlonal defense
Military doctrine
New technology developments
Commercial objectives

Concept Development
Reassess potential requirements generated
during needs analysis
Develop and assess alternative mission
operations concepts
Develop and assess alternative space mission

afchJtectures
Estimate
performance
life-cycle cost
schedule
risk

supportability
produceabllity
funding promes
retum on Investment

estimating the factors shown in the right-hand column of Table 1-3. The information
becomes part of an overall system concept High-level managers in the user, operator,
and development communities evaluate whether the concepts, initial mission objectives, and potential requirements meet the mission's intentions. If the program satisfies
the need at a reasonable cost, it passes the Requirements Validation milestone and
proceeds into the Detailed Development Phase.
This book provides the technical processes and information necessary to explore
concepts for many space missions. Table 1-3 identifies a major concern that can
undermine the entire process: in many cases, users and operators analyze the needs and
formulate mission'requirements apart from the development community. Then they
pass these requirementS "over the wall" without negotiating. The developer often
generates alternatives without the operators and users. These autonomous actions
produce minimum performance at maximum cost
To explore a concept successfoDy, we must remove the waDs
between the sponsor, space operators, IlSers or customers, and
developers and become a team.
A good team considers the mission's operations,objectives, and requirements as

well as the available technology to develop the best possible mission concept at the
lowest possible Iife-cycIe cost
All space missions consist of a set of elements or components as shown in
Fig. 1-3. The arrangement of these elements form a space mission architecture.
Various organizations and programs define their mission elements differently,
although all of the elements are norma1Iy present in any space mission.
The subject of the mission is the thing which interacts with or is sensed by the space
payload: moisture content, atmospheric temperature, or pressure for weather missions;
types of vegetation, water, or geological formations for Earth-sensing missions; or a
rocket or intercontinental ballistic missile for space defense missions. We must decide

Ground

Element

Rg. 1·3. Space Mission Architecture. Ali space missions Include these basic elements to
some degree. See text for definitions. Requirements for the system flow from the
operator, end user, and developer and are allocated to the various mission elements.

what part of the electromagnetic spectrum to use in order to sense the subject, thus
determining the type of sensor as well as payload weight, size, and power. In many
missions, we may trade off the subject For example, if we are trying to track a
missile during powered flight, the subject could be the rocket body or exhaust plume,
or both.
For communications and navigation missions the subject is a set of equipment
on the Earth or on another spacecraft, including communication terminals, televisions.
receiving equipment for GPS navigation, or other user-furnished equipment The key
parameters of this equipment characterize the subject for these types of missions.

i

I

~ill

12

The Space Mission Analysis and Design Process

1.3

The payload consists of the hardware and software that sense or interact with the
subject Typically, we trade off and combine severaISensOrs and experiments to form
the payload, which largely determines the mission's cost, complexity, and effectiveness. The subsystems of the spacecraft bus support the payload by providing orbit and
attitude maintenance, power, co~d, telemetry and data handling, structure and
rigidity, and temperature control. The payload and spacecraft bus together are called
the spacecraft, space segment, or launch vehicle payload.
The launch system includes the launch facility, launch vehicle and any upper stage
required to place the spacecraft in orbit, as well as interfaces, payload fairing, and
associated ground-support equipment and facilities. The selected launch system
constrains the size, shape, and mass of the spacecraft.
The orbit is the spacecraft's path or trajectory. Typically, there is a separate initial
parking orbit, transfer orbit, and final mission orbit There may also be an end-of-life
or disposal orbit The mission orbit significantly influences every element of the
mission and provides many options for trades in mission architecture.
The communications architecture is the arrangement of components which satisfy
the mission's communication, command, and control requirements. It depends stronglyon the amount and timing requirements of data to be transferred, as well as the number, location, availability, and communicating ability of the space and ground assets.
The ground system consists of fixed and mobile ground stations around the globe
connected by various data links. They allow us to command and track the spacecraft,
receive and process telemetry and mission data, and distribute the information to the
operators and users.
Mission operations consist of the people, hardware, and software that execute the
mission, the mission operations concept, and attendant policies, procedures, and data
flows. Fmally, the command, control, and communications (C3) architecture contains
the spacecraft, communications architecture, ground segment, and mission operations
elements.

1.3 Step 1: Definition of Mission Objectives
The first step in analyzing and designing a space mission is to define mission
objectives: the broad goals which the system must achieve to be productive. Figure 1-4
shows sample objectives for FrreSat We draw these qualitative mission objectives
largely from the mission statement In contrast, the mission requirements and
constraints discussed in Sec. 1.4 are quantitative expressions of how well we achieve
our objectives-balancing what we want against what the budget will allow. Thus,
whereas we may modify objectives slightly or not at all during concept exploration,
we often trade requirements throughout the process. For FrreSat to be FrreSat, it must
detect, identify, and monitor forest fires. As we trade and implement elements of the
system during concept exploration, we must ensure that they meet this fundamental
objective. An excellent example of the careful definition of broad mission objectives
for space science missions is given by the National Research Council [1990].
Ordinarily, space missions have several objectives. Some are secondary objectives
which can be met by the defined set of equipment, and some are additional objectives
which may demand more equipment Nearly all space missions have a hidden agerula
which consists of secondary, typically nontechnical, objectives. Frequently political,
social, or cultural, they are equally real and equally important to satisfy. For example,
a secondary objective for FrreSat could be to show the public a visible response to

1.3

Step 1: Definition of Mission Objectives

-

13

RreSat

Mission Objectives

Primary ObJectJve:
To detect, Identify, and monitor forest fires throughout the UnltedStates,
Including Alaska and HawaII, In near real time.
Secondary ObJectives:
To demonstrate to the public that positive action Is underway to contain
forest fires.
To collect statistical data on the outbreak and growth of forest fires.
To monitor forest fires for other countries.
To collect other forest management data.
Fig. 1-4.

FlreSat Mission ObJectives. Unlike requirements, which specify numerical levels of

performance, the mission objectives are broad statements of what the system must do
to be useful.

frequent forest fires. Third World nations produce satellites in part to show that their
developing technology makes them important players in international politics. Of
course, this secondary political objective for space programs has been important for
many years in both the United States and the former Soviet Union. If we are to meet
all of a space mission's objectives, we must identify secondary and nontechnical
objectives as well as primary ones.
Multiple objectives also occur when we use a single satellite to meet different
demands. For example, we may use FIreSat's temperature-sensing instruments to
monitor global changes in ocean temperatures. In this case, the secondary objectives
could become as important as the primary ones. A second example would be adding a
communications payload to FrreSat to permit better communications among the
distributed groups who fight forest fires. Although the primary objective usually will
be quite stable, secondary objectives may shift to meet the users' needs and the
redefined potential of the space mission concept
As in the case of most of the top-level trades, we recommend strongly against
numerical formulas that try to "score" how well a mission meets its objectives. We can
compute probabilities for' achieving some technical objectives, but trying to
numerically combine the coverage characteristics of different FrreSat constellations
with the political impact of launching FrreSat is too simplistic for effective decision
making. Instead, we must identify objectives separately so we can judge how to
balance alternative objectives and mission concepts.
Good mission objectives incorporate user needs and, at least indirectIy, the space
characteristics we are exploiting to achieve them. As stated earlier, space is expensive.
If our end objective does not use one of the fundamental space characteristics, it will
likely cost less to do on Earth. For example, there is little reason to manufacture lowcost consumer goods or publish books in space.
What fundamental characteristics of space make space missions desirable?
Table 1-4 lists some of them with their corresponding missions. Exploring and using
space serves various objectives, from extremely practical telecommunications and
weather, to major scientific observatories hoping to understand the universe better, to
advanced military applications and exploring and exploiting the Moon and planets.
Our objectives are diverse partIy because we use many different space characteristics.

1.3

1.4 Step 2: PreUminary Estimate of Mission Needs, Requirements, and Constraints 15

For example, materials processing uses the microgravity and high vacuum of space,
disregarding the spacecraft's position over the Earth. Conversely, communications or
observation satellites emphasize Earth coverage as the most fundamental space
characteristic to achieve their objectives.

larger than present development To take practical advantage of these characteristics,
we must greatly reduce the costs of exploring and exploiting space. Fmding ways to
lower these costs is a principal objective of this book. (See Wertz and Larson [1996].)

TABLE 1-4. Characteristics of Space Exploited by Various Space Missions. Note the wide
variety and that many are only beginning to be used. (Spacecraft acronyms are
defined In the Index.)

1.4 Step 2: Preliminary J£stjmate of Mission Needs,
Requirements, and Constraints

14

CharacterisUc

The Space Mission Analysis and Design Process

Relevant
Missions

Degree of
UtIlization

Some are mature
IntelSat
GPS
Industries; major new
advances will corne with NOAA satellites
DBS
Increasad onboard
processing

Global
Perspective

Communications
Navigation
Weather
Surveillance

Above the

Scientific observations WeD developed; space
at all wavelengths
observatories will
continue to dramatlcaDy
change our view of
the unlversa

Atmosphere

Now In Infancy;
may be many future
applications

Gravity-free
EnvIronment

MaterIaJs processing
In space

Abundant

Space industrialization Essentially none
Asteroid exploration
Solar power sateDites

Resources
Exploration of
Space Itself

Exploration of Moon
and planets, scientific
probes, asteroid and
comet missions

Sample
Missions

Space Telescope
GAO

Chandra X-Ray
Observatory
IUE
Industrial Space Facility
ISS
Cornet
Space colonies
Solar power satemtes
NEAP

Manned lunar or
Initial flybys have been
done; Some landings
Martian basas
done or planned; limited Apollo
manned exploration
Gailleo

Table 1-4 reveals a second impOrtant feature: the varying levels of exploitation for
different space characteristics. Many current missions use the global perspective of
space--for telecommunications, weather, navigation, and other aspects of Earth
monitoring. Space-based telecommunications will continue to grow, but it is already
a major and mature industry. Satellite communications by telephone and television
have become a part of everyday life and have helped to bring about a communications
revolution largely responsible for our sbrinking world. Equally dramatic changes are
likely in the future as new applications for space-based communications and navigation continue to emerge.
In contrast to telecommunications, materials processing and precision manufacturing in gravity-free space is only in its infancy. Major strides appear possible in
pharmaceutical and semiconductor devices that may bring about an entirely new
industrial segment Exploiting space's almost limitless resources is even further
removed. Unlimited continuous power and huge, accessible supplies of physical
materials may, in the long run, maintain an industrialized society without destroying
the Earth's fragile environment These objectives will" require greater vision than
those for the more fully developed areas of communications, resource mapping, and
monitoring.
We see from Table 1-4 that we have either not used or only begun to use most of
the ouUor characteristics of space, so changes in future space exploration should be far

Having defined the broad objectives that the space mission is to achieve, we wish
to transfonn them into preliminary sets of numerical requirements and constraints on
the space mission's performance and operation. These requirements and constraints
will largely establish the operational concepts that will meet our objectives. Thus, we
must develop requirements which truly reflect the mission objectives and be willing to
trade them as we more clearly define the space system.
To transfonn mission objectives into requirements, we must look at three broad

areas:
• Functional Requirements, which define how well the system must perfonn to
meet its objectives.
• Operational Requirements, which determine how the system operates and how
users interact with it to achieve its broad objectives. '
• Constraints, which limit cost, schedule, and implementation techniques
available to the system designer.
The needs, requirements, and constraints for any specific mission will depend upon
the mission itself and how we implement it. For example, the mission may be a
commercial venture, a government scientific program, or a crash emergency program
responding to dire need. Still, most space missions develop their requirements according to the basic characteristics in Table 1-5.
Establishing top-level mission requirements is extremely difficult, depending on
mission needs and on the perceived complexity or cost of meeting them. Therefore,
contrary to frequent practice, we should iterate the numerical requirements many times
in the design process. The first estimate of mission requirements must come from the
goals and objectives combined with some view o.f wh~t is feasible. ~n, ~e. can
reiterate or slightly modify requirements and specifications from preVIOUS JD1SSlOns.
thus carrying over information known from those missions.. course, we must be
prepared to trade these requirements as we develop the lDlSS10n concept, thereby
avoiding the problem of keeping old and inappropriate requirements.
The next step in setting up preliminary mission requirements is to look for the
"hidden agenda" discussed in Sec. 1.3 and Chap. 2. This agenda contains the devel~
oper's implicit goals and constraints. For example, the FrreSat mission may need to be
perceived as responding quickly to public demand. Thus, an extended R&D program
to develop the most appropriate FrreSat satellite may not be acceptable.
As discussed further in Chap. 21, we must recognize that developing a space
mission depends on political, legal, and economic elements, as well as technology.
Thus, the most appropriate solution must meet mission technic~ requirements and the
developer's political and economic goals. For example, satellIte systems for a small
nation may use components built in that nation or develop some new components
locally, even though ihey would cost less.i~bought in '?therc~untries. In this~, we
would spend more money to meet a polItical constraInt: usmg the space lDlSSlon to

Of.

------------------------------------~~---~--------

'11

16

The Space Mission AiJalysis and Design Process

1.4

TABLE 1-5. Examples of Top-Level Mission Requirements. We typically subdivide these
top-level requlrements~Rtomore~c requirements applicable to specific space
missions.
Requirement

Where
Discussed

Fectors which Typically
Impact the Requirement

RreSat Example

FUNCTIONAL
Performance

Chaps.
9.13

Primary objective. paytoad
size. orbit, pointing

4 temperature levels
30 m resolution
500 m location accuracy

Coverage

Sec. 7.2

Orbit, swath width. number
of satelrltes. scheduling

Daily coverage of 750 million
acres within continental U.S.

Responsiveness Sec. 7.2.3.
Chap. 14

Communications
architecture, processing
delays. operations

Send registered mission data
within 30 min to up to 50 users

Secondary
Mission

Chap. 2

As above

4 temparature levels for pest
management

Duration

Sees. 1.4,
10.5.2. 19.2

Experiment or operations,
Mission operational at least
levelofredundancy.ahftuda 10 years

Availability

Sec. 19.1

Level of redundancy

OPERAnONAL

98% excluding weather,
3-day maximum outage

Survivability

Sec. 8.2

Orbit, hardening. electronics Natural environment only

Data
Distribution

Chaps.
13.15

Communications
architecture

Data Content,
Form,and
Format

Chaps. 2,
9.13,14

User needs. level and place Location and extent of fire on
of processing. payload
any of 12 map bases. average
temperature for each 30 m2 grid

Cost

Chap. 20

Manned flight, number
of spacecraft, size and
complexity. orbit

< $2OM/yr + R&D

Schedule

Sees.

Technical readiness.
program size

Initial operating capability within
5 yrs. final operating capability
within 6yrs

Law and policy

NASA mission

Sponsor. whether
international program

Responsive to public demand
for action

Orbit, lifetime

Natural

1.4 Step 2: Preliminary Estimate of Mission Needs, Requirements, an~ Constraints 17

Finally, we reiterate that preliminary mission requirements should be established
subject to later trades. Mission designers often .simply lty to meet the procuring
group's requirements and constraints, because not meeting them appears to be a strong
competitive disadvantage. Consequently, designers may not modify them, even if
changes could make the system cost less or perform better for a given cost Section 3.3
and Chap. 4 detail this process of trading on system requirements to maximize performance vs. cost
As. an example, we consider the requirement for mission duration or spacecraft
lifetime, which mayor may not be the same. This parameter exemplifies the difficulty
of establishing requirements. The length of the mission is often indefinite. We want to
detect, identify, and monitor forest fIreS continuously at a reasonable cost per year. In
practice, however, we must develop a system that meets this need and then deploy it
with an established design life and, perhaps, a replenishment philosophy. The design
life of the individual FtreSat spacecraft will strongly affect cost and will determine the
level of redundancy, propellant budgets, and other key system parameters. In principle, we would like to obtain a graph of spacecraft cost vs. design life as shown in Fig.
1-5. We could then easily compute the total expected cost per year for different design
lives, as shown by the dashed line, and the minimum spacecraft cost per year. We
could also assess technological obsolescence, or the point at which we wish to replace
the spacecraft because of better or cheaper technology.

;

\

Up to 500 fire-monitoring offices
+ 2.000 rangers worldwide (max.
of 100 simultaneous users)

\\ +--- Cost per Year
\
\

\
\ \

Regulations
Political

Environment

Sec. 21.1
Sec. 21.1
Sees. 8.1.

Total Cost ~ I
I

" '

\
\

Interfaces

Chaps.
14.15

Level of user and operator
Infrastructure

Comm. relay and Interoperable
through NOAA ground s1ations

Development
Constraints

Chap. 2

Sponsoring organization

Launch on STS or expendable;
No unique operations people at
data distribution nodes

develop and promote natio~al engineering resources. The technical community often
sets aside nontechnical considerations and regards them as less important or less real
than technical constraints. But a successful mission design must include all requirements and constraints placed on the system.

,,

-----~.---------~
"
DesignSlife

,

Spacecraft

21.2

"

,

\

CONSTRAINTS

1.3,19.1.
Chaps. 2, 12

"

Cost

"

" ....

Best Spacecraft

....... , ......

-------""---Launch Cost

Spacecraft Design life
Rg.1-5.

HypotheUcai Curve of Cost vs. Spacecraft Design life. The cost per year Is the
total cost dMded by the design life. In principle, we should use such curves to set the
Spacecraft DesIgn life requirement In practice, they rarely exist. See Sec. 20.5 for a
Cost vs. DesIgn life curve for FireSat

In practice, figures such as 1-5 are almost never done or, at best, are done
qualitatively. The mission duration is normally assigned rather arbitrarily with a
general perception of cost per year. ThUs, there may be a push to produce spacecraft
lasting 5 or 10 years because people believe these will be more economical than ones
lasting only a few years. No matter how we choose the design life, we would like to
go through the process described above for decisions about mission lifetime. If at all

18

The Space Mission Analysis and Design Process

possible, it would be desirable. to create a chart similar to Fig. 1-5 based on even crude
estimates of spacecraft cost Doing so provides a much stronger basis for, establishing mission requirements and, e.g., determining whether we should push harder for a
longer spacecraft lifetime or back off on this requirement to reduce spacecraft
cost
Having made a preliminary estimate of mission requirements and constraints, we
proceed in Chap. 2 to define and characterize one or more baseline mission concepts.
The issue of refining requirements and assessing how well objectives can be met is
discussed in Chaps. 3 and 4.

References
Boden, Daryl G. and WIley 1. Larson. 1996. Cost Effective Space Mission Operations.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Davidoff, Martin. 1998. The Radio Amateur's Satellite Handbook. Newington, CI':
American Radio Relay League.
Defense Systems Management College. 1990. System Engineering Management
Guide. Ft Belvoir, VA: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Kay, WD. 1995. Can Democracies Fly in Space? The Challenge of Revitalizing the
U.S. Space Program. Westport, CI': Praeger Publishing.
National Research Council. 1990. Strategy for the Detection and Study of Other
Planetary Systems. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Przemieniecki, J.S. 1993. Acquisition ofDefense Systems. Washington, DC: American
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.
Rechtin, Eberhardt 1991. Systems Architecting. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Ruskin, Arnold M. and W. Eugene Estes. 1995. What Every Engineer Should Know
About Project Management (2nd Edition). New York: Marcel Dekker,lnc.
Shisbko, Robert 1995. NASA Systems Engineering Handbook. NASA.
Wertz, James R. and WIley J. Larson. 1996. Reducing Space Mission Cost. Torrance, CA: Microcosm Press and Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.

Chapter 2
Mission Characterization
James R. Wert7, Microcosm, Inc.
Richard P. Reinert, BaD Aerospace Systems
2.1

Step 3: Identifying Alternative Mission Concepts
Data Delivery; Tasking, Scheduling, and Control;

Mission Timeline
2.2
2.3
2.4

Step 4: Identifying Alternative Mission Architectures
Step 5: Identifying System Drivers
Step 6: Characterizing the Mission Architecture

Mission characterization is the initial process of selecting and defining a space
mission. The goal is to select the best overall approach from the wide range available
to execute a space mission. Typically we wish to choose the loweSt cost or the most
cost-effective approach, and provide a traceable rationale that is intelligtble to decision
makers.
The initial process of mission characterization is discussed for general missions by
Griffin and French [1991] and Pisacane and Moore [1994]. Elbert [1987, 1996] and
Agrawal [1986] provide similar discussions for communications and geosynchrono1JS
satellites. Eckart [1996] and Woodcock [1986] discuss this process for manned missions and Wall and Ledbetter [1991] do so for remote sensing. Boden and Larson
[1996] discuss initial characterization for mission operations and London [1994]
provides a similar overview for launch vehicles, with a strong emphasis on reducing
cost. Davidoff [1998] and Wertz and Larson [1996] discuss specific mechanisms
applicable to low-cost and reduced cost missions.
The unconstrained number of mission options is huge, considering all possible
combinations of orbits, launch systems, spacecraft, and mission concepts. The goal of
this chapter is to prune this large number to a manageable level, without discarding
options that offer significant advantages. We will do so by applying the requirements
and constraints from Chap. 1 to pare down the list of alternatives. As an example, for
most commercial communications applications, we would traditionally restrict ourselves to a geosynchronous orbit and only a few launch systems. However, the large
number of low-Earth orbit communications constellations suggests that other options
should be considered.
With requirements and constraints defined and alternative mission concepts
selected, we must define each concept to the level required for meaningful comparisons. As Fig. 2-1 shows, we need to do this independently for each of the alternative
mission cOncepts identified as "A" and "B" in the figure. Chapter 3 describes in more
detail how we then evaluate the concepts, compare them in terms of cost and performance, and select one or more baselines. At the same time, we must keep track of the

19

20

Mission Characterization
2.1

Step 3: Identifying Alternative Mission Concepts

21

In common use, "mission concept" "concept of operations:' and "mission
architecture" are frequently interchangeable and, at best, vaguely defined. Throughout
this chapter, we wish to clearly distinguish between them. The mission concept, discussed in Sec. 2.1, is a broad statement of how the mission will wOIk in practice. This
should not be confused with mission operations, which provides the details of how
people will operate and control the mission. The mission architecture, introduced in
Sec. 2.2, is the mission concept plus a definition of each of the major elements of the
mission.

DeIInIIIon of
MIssIon Objecllves
(Chapter 1)

2.1 Step 3: Identifying Alternative Mission Concepts
Mlss!on
CharacIerlzat!on

The broad mission concept is the most fundamental statement of how the mission
will work-that is, how it gets its data or carries out the mission to satisfy the end
user's needs. The mission concept as we are using it here consists of the four principal
elements in Table 2-1. Notice that most of these elements are somehow associated
with data or infonnation. Except for manufacturing in space and a small number of
other space payloads, most space missions are concerned fundamentally with the
generation or flow of infonnation. Thus, FrreSat's mission is to generate and communicate to an end user infonnation about forest fires. Communications satellites move
.data and information from one place to another. Weather, surveillance, and navigation
satellites are all concerned with generating and communicating information. Thus,
data flow is centmI to most space missions. How will FireSat determine where a lIfe
is and how big it is? How will the system communicate that information to the fire
fighter in a truck or plane? Once we answer these broad questions, we begin to understand FrreSat's abilities and limits.

(Chapter 2)

MlssIon Concept
Evaluation and Selection
(Chapter 3)

Evaluate
Concepts
• Cost

• Perlarmance

MoEs

~

Measures

01
EIfec!Iveness
(MoEs)

TABLE 2-1. Elements of the Mission Concept of Operations. See Table 2-2 for a list of key
trades and where discussed. Note that we discuss communications architecture in
Sec. 13.1.
Element
Data Delivery

Definition
How mission and housekeeping
data are generated or collected,
distributed, and used

Communications How the various components of
Architecture
the system talk to each other

Fig. 2-1.

Concept Exploration Flow. One key for successrully implementing this flow is to
iterate. Successive iterations through the flow will result in greater understanding and
can uncover critical requirements and system drivers.
'

e~emen~ and system c~ts using the characteristics generated in the study and the techruques In Chap. 20. This procedure results in a rough order ofmagnitude (ROM) cost
and an understanding of relative costs to support further trades and system evaluations.

FlreSat Example
How is imagery collected? How are for-

est fires identified? How are the results
transmitted to the fire fighter in the field?
What communications network is used
to transmit forest fire data to the users in
the field?

Tasking,
Scheduling,
and Control

How the system decides what to What sensors are active and when is
do In the long term and short term data being transmitted and processed?
WhIch forested areas are receMng
attention this month?

Mission
Timeline

The overall schedule for planning, When will the first F1reSat become
building, deployment, operations, operational? What is the schedule for
replacement, and end-of-life
sateDHe replenishment?

As Table 2-2 shows, defining the mission concept consists of defining the various
options that are available and then selecting the most appropriate. Section 2.2
describes how we define options and take a first cut at the broad choices available to
us. The process of selecting among them described in Sec. 3.2 is called system trades.
Here we are interested in what these trades are and what some of the broader alterna-

Mission Characterization

22

2.1

tives are to generate and transmit data. The process of defining how to transmit the
data between the spacecraft and various users and controllers on the ground is called
the communications architecture and is discussed in Chap. 13.
TABLE 2-2.

Process for DefIning the Mission Concept of Operations. See Table 2-1 for
definitions and AreSat example.
Where

Key Trades

Step
1. Deline data delivery process for
- Mission and housekeeping data

Space vs. ground processing
Levelofautononrv
Central vs. distributed proceSSing

2. Define tasking, scheduling, and control for Levelof~onomy
- Mission and housekeeping data
Central vs. distributed control
- Long term and short term

Discussed

Sec. 2.1.1
Chap. 13

Sec. 2.1.2

3. Deline communications architecture for
- Mission and housekesplng data

Data rates bandwidth
TImeliness of communications

Sec. 13.1

4. Define preliminary mission timeline for

Replenishment and
end-of-iHe options
Deployment strategy for
mUltiple satellites
Level of timeline liexibHity

Sec. 2.1.3

NlA

NlA

- Concept development
- Production and daployment
- Operations and end-of-life

5. Iterate and document

The mission timeline differs from other elements of the mission concept in
Table 2-1. It represents the overall schedule for developing, planning, and carrying out
the mission. This defines whether it is a one-time only scientific experiment or longterm operational activity which will require us to replace and update satellites. In
either case, we must decide whether the need for the mission is immediate or long
term. Should we give high priority to near-term schedules or allow more extensive
planning for the mission? Of course, much of this has to do with the funding for the
mission: whether money is available immediately or will be available over time as we
begin to demonstrate the mission's usefulness.
2.1.1 Data DeHvery
Space missions involve two distinct types of data-mission data and housekeeping
data. Mission data is generated, tmnsmitted, or received by the mission payload. This
is the basic information that is central to what the mission is all about For FrreSat, this
data starts out as infrared images on a focal plane and ends up as the latitude, longitude,
and basic characteristics of a forest fire transmitted to a fire fighter on the ground. The
mission data has potentially very high data rates associated with it. However, the need
for this data may be sporiKIic. Thus, FrreSat may generate huge quantities of raw data
during periods of time that it is passing over the forests, but there is little need for this
same level of data when it is over the poles or the oceans.
Ultimately, the processed mission data may go directly to the end user or through
ground stations and communication networks associated with mission operations. This
will, of course, have a fundamental effect on how the mission works. In the first case,
FrreSat would process its imagery and send the forest fire information as it is being
observed to the fire fighters in the field. In the second case, data would go instead to

Step 3: Identifying Alternative Mission Concepts

2.1

23

an operations center, where a computer system or human operators would evaluate it,
compare it with previous data, and determine the location and characteristics of a
forest fire. Then, the operations center would tmnsmit this information to the fire
fighters in the field. The result is about the same in both cases, but the system's abilities, limits, characteristics, and costs may be dramatically different
In contrast to the mission data, housekeeping data is the information used to
support the mission itself-the spacecraft's orbit and attitude, the batteries' temperature and state of charge, and the status and condition of the spacecraft's parts. Unlike
the mission data, which is typically sporadic and may have huge data rates, the housekeeping data is usually continuous and at a low data rate. Continuously monitoring
system performance does not require much information transfer by modem standards.
In addition, rather dian going to the end user, housekeeping data goes to the system
monitoring and control activity within mission operations. Although housekeeping
and mission data are distinct, we often need housekeeping data to make the mission
data useful. For example, we must know the spacecraft's orbit and attitude to determine the ground lookpoint of the payload sensors and thereby locate the fire.
For both mission and housekeeping data, the data delivery system should be an
information management-oriented process. We want to take a large amount of raw
data, frequently from a variety of sensors, and efficiently transform it into the information the users need and provide it to them in a timely manner. We do not know at
first whether sending FireSat data directly to the field or sending it first to a mission
operations center for interpretation and analysis is the best approach. But we do know
our choice will dramatically affect how well FrreSat works and whether or not it is an
efficient and effective system.
The principal trades associated with data delivery are:
• Space vs. ground-how much of the data processing occurs on board the spacecraft vs. how much is done at mission operations or by the end user?

• Central vs. distributed processing-is one computer talking to another computer,
or does one large central computer on the spacecraft or on the ground process

everything?

• Level ofautonomy'"-how much do people need to intervene in order to provide
intelligent analysis and minimize costs?
These trades are strongly interrelated. Thus, autonomy is important by itself, but is
also a key element of the space vs. ground trade. If human intervention is required (i.e.,
it can't be done autonomously), then the process must be done on the ground-or it
must be a very large spacecraft. We will discuss each of these trades below after we
have looked at the data delivery process as a whole. Autonomy is discussed in
Sec. 2.1.2, because it is also critical to tasking and control.
The best way to start looking at the data-delivery problem is a data-flow analysis.
This defines where the data originates and what has to happen to it before it gets to
where it needs to go. To examine the data flow we can use a data-jlow diagram as
shown in Fig. 2-2 for the FrreSat mission. A data-flow diagram lets us outline the tasks
which we need to do, even though we don't understand yet how we will do most of
them. For FrreSat we know that we need some type of information collection, probably
• The language here can be confusing. An autonomous operation runs without human intervention. An autonomous spacecraft runs without intervention from outside the spacecraft. .

2.1

Mission Characterization

24

a camera or imager or some other mechanism for detecting fIreS. As shown across the
tQ}LnLW ofEIg. 2-2. this imaging information must be digitized, probably filtered in
some fashion, and transferred to a map of forest regions. We must then interpret the
image to identify whether a fire exists, incorporate the results on a map, and distribute
the map to the end user.

Spacecraft
or Ground

Spacecraft

or Ground

Rg. 2-2.

~,

Data Soun:e

'e..

Data End User

.,~,

Fire Control
Central

Orbit and attitude data are also part
of the "housekeeping" sy$teJII

AreSat Data-Row Diagram. The purpose of the data flow is to view the space mission from a data-oriented perspective. We want to know where thE! data comes from,
what processing must be done, and where the results are used. Our principal mission
objective is to provide the necessary data to the end user at minimum cost and risk.

To put the image on a map, we need to detennine the spacecraft's orbit and attitude.
The attitude will almost certainly be detennined on board. The orbit may be determined either on board or by observations from the ground. In either case, the orbit and
attitude information are combined to determine where on the ground the sensor is
looking. We then select the map corresponding to the area we are looking at so we can
correlate the sensor data with some physical location the fire fighters recognize.
Even though we are not certain yet how the data will be used, we can be fairly sure
that our end data from FireSat will have several applications other than immediate use
by the fire fighters. We will want to archive it in some central location for recordkeeping and improving our capacity to analyze and interpret future data. Finally, we
will sort out a large amount of ancillary data, such as statistics, reports, and forestmanagement information, and use it over an extended period. The need for this data
does not have the real-time demand of the fire data itself.
The importance of the data-flow diagram is that it lets us see what has to happen in
order to make our mission work. For FireSat, we need to combine the mission sensor
with orbit and attitude information in order to make our system work in real time.
However, the most difficult step is probably the one labeled "Image Interpretation and
Analysis." Can an automated system quickly detect forest fires and send information
directly to the user, or do we need extensive interpretation and analysis by trained
people in mission operations? What type of experiments or information must we have
to determine which of these is possible? Even after we have selected an approach, we

2.1

Step 3: Identifying Alternative Mission Concepts

25

should revisit it regularly to see that it still makes sense. If we decide that FlieSat's
real-time requirements demand data processing in a computer on board the spacecraft,
we may dramaticaI1y drive up the cost because onboard processing is expensive. Our
mission analysis may result in an automated FrreSat which costs several times the
annual budget of the FOrest Service. If so, we need to reconsider whether it would be
more economical to have an analyst on the grOlmd interpret the data and then simply
phone the results to an appropriate fire station. The data-flow diagram is valuable in
helping to identify and track these central issues.
We will now look at two of the three principal trades associated with data delivery:
space vs. ground processing and central vs. distributed processing. Section 2.1.2 and
Chap. 23.3 discuss the level of autonomy.
Space vs. ground processing trades. In most earlier space missions, ground
stations processed nearly all of the data because spacebome processors could not do
much. Chapter 16 describes several reasons onboard processing lags ground processing. But many onboard processors are now available with dramaticaI1y increased
capacity. Consequently, a major trade for future missions is how much to process data
on board the spacecraft vs. on the ground, either at a mission-operations facility or
with the end user.
Section 3.2 describes how we undertake these and other system trades and compare
the results. The main issues in the space vs. ground trade are as follows:

1. Autonomy-how independent do we want the system to be of analysis and control by a mission operator? If evaluation by people is critical, we must do much
of the data processing on the ground. If autonomous processing is appropriate,
it can be done on board the spacecraft, at a central ground facility, or among the
end users. The level of autonomy is both a key trade in its own right and an
element of the space vs. ground trade.

2. Data latency-how late can the data get to the end user? If we are allowed only
fractions of a second, we must go to automated processes, probably on board the
spacecraft. For FireSat, although we need the data in "near real time," the delays
associated with sending the data to the ground for processing are not critical.

3. Communications bandwidth-how much data needs to be transmitted? If we
have large amounts of data from a sensor, we should process and compress it as
near the source as possible. Bringing down all of the FrreSat imaging data and
then deciding what to process further on the ground will cause an enormous
communications problem and will probably drive up the FrreSat mission's cost
needlessly.

4. Single vs. multiple users-H there are a large number of end users, as would be
the case for FrreSat, we may be able to save considerable money by doing a high
level of processing on board the spacecraft and sending the results directly down
to the individUal users.

5. Location of end user-is the "end user" for any particular data element on the
ground or in space? In a space-ta-space relay or a system for providing
automatic orbit maintenance, the end application is in space itself. In this case,
sending data to the ground for processing and then returning the results to the
space system can be very complex and costly. On the ground, the comple,?~ of
the system is strongly affected by whether there is one end user at the JDlSSIOn
operations center or multiple, scattered users, as in the case of FrreSat.

26

Mission Characterization

2.1

Even if we choose to process data mostly in space, the basic system design should
allow us to obtain or recreate selected raw data for analysis on the ground. A fully
automated FueSat should have some means to record or broadcast the raw imaging
data, so mission planners and analysts can evaluate how well the system is working,
fix problems, and plan alternative and better techniques for later missions.
Traditionally, space software has been much more expensive than ground software.
This suggests that processing on the ground is generally lower cost than processing on
board the spacecraft. We believe that this will change in the future and, therefore, software cost should not be a major trade element in the space vs. ground processing trade.
The cost of software is a function of what is done and how reliable we need to make
it, rather than where it is done. We can choose to make highly reliable software as
nearly error-free as possible for our ground systems and this software will have the
high cost inherent with most previous onboard software systems. On the other hand,
simple software with many reusable components can be developed economically and
used on the spacecraft as well as on the ground.
The space vs. ground processing trade will be a key issue and probably a significant
stumbling block for most missions in the near future. For short-lived, nontime-critical
missions, it will probably be more economical to work on the ground with little automation. For long-lived missions, or time-critical applications, we will have to
automate the processing and then do space vs. ground trades to minimize the operation
and end-user costs. In any case, we wish to use the data flow analysis to evaluate where
the data is coming from and where it will be used. If possible, we would like to minimize the communication requirements and associate data (e.g., attach time or position
tags) as early as possible after the relevant data has been created.
For FueSat the payload sensor generates an enormous amount of data, most of
which will not be useful. One way to effectively deal with large amounts of raw data
on board the spacecraft is to compress the data (i.e., reduce the amount of data to be
stored or transmitted) prior to transmitting it to the ground. The data is then recreated
on the ground using decompression algorithms: There is a variety of methods for
compressing data, both lossless and lossy. Lossless data compresSion implies that no
information is lost due to compression while lossy compression has some "acceptable"
level of loss. Lossless compression can achieve about a 5 to 1 ratio whereas lossy
compression can achieve up to 80 to 1 reduction in data. Many of the methods of data
compression store data only when value changes. Other approaches are based on quantization where a range of values is com~ using mathematical algorithms or
fractal mathematics. By using these methods, we can compress the data to a single
algorithm that is transmitted to the ground and the image is recreated based on the
algorithm expansion. With the use of fractals, we can even interpolate a higher resolution solution than we started with by running the fractal for an extended period of time
[Lu, 1997]. We select a method for data compression based on its strengths and weaknesses, the critical nature of the data, and the need to recreate it exactly [Sayood, 1996].
When we transmit housekeeping data we would generally use lossless compression
for several reasons. First, raw housekeeping data is not typically voluminous. Second,
it is important that none of the data is lost due to compression. However, when we
transmit an image we might easily use lossy compression. We could either preview the
image using lossy compression of we could say that the recovered image is "good
enough." Alternatively, a high resolution picture may have so much information that
the human eye can not assimilate the information at the level it was generated. Again,
in this case a lossy compression technique may be appropriate.

2.1

Step 3: Identifying Alternative Mission Concepts

27

In the FrreSat example, we might use a sensor on board the spacecraft that takes a
digital image of the heat generated at various positions on the Earth. The digital image
will be represented by a matrix of numbers, where each pixel contains a value corresponding to the heat at that point on the Earth's surface. (Of course, we will need some
method, such as GPS, for correlating the pixel in the image to .the location on the
Earth.) If we assume that the temperature at each location or pixel is represented by
3 bits, we can distinguish eight thermal levels. However, if we set a threshold such that
a '"baseline" temperature is represented with a 0, we might find that over many
portions of the Earth, without fire, the image might be up to 70% nominal or O. This
still allows for several levels of distinction for fires or other "hot spots" on the Earth.
Rather than transmit a 0 data value for each cold pixel, we can compress the data and
send only those pixel locations and values which are not O. As long as the decompression software understands this ground rule, the image can be exactly recreated on the
ground. In this case, we can reduce our raw data volume to the number of hot spots
that occur in any given area.
Central vs. distributed processing. This is a relatively new issue, because most
prior spacecraft did not have sufficient processing capability to make this a meaningful
trade. However, as discussed above, the situation has changed. The common question
now is, "how many computers should the spacecraft have?" Typically, weight and
parts-count-conscious engineers want to avoid distributed processing. However,
centralized processing can make integration and test extremely difficult. Because
integration and test of both software and hardware may drive cost and schedule. we
must seriously consider them as part of the processing trade.
Our principal recommendations in evaluating central vs. distributed processing are:

• Group like functions together
• Group functions where timing is critical in a single computer
• Look for potentially incompatible functions before assigning multiple functio~
to one computer
• Maintain the interface between groups and areas of responsibility outside of the
computer
• Give serious consideration to integration and test before grouping multiple functions in a single computer
Grouping like functions has substantial advantages. For example, attitude detP.nnination and attitude control may well reside in the same computer. They use much of
the same data, share common algorithms, and may have time-critical elements.
Similarly, orbit determination and control could reasonably reside in a single navigation computer, together with attitude determination and control. These hardware and
software elements are likely to be the responsibility of a single group and will tend to
undergo common integration and testing.
In contrast, adding payload processing to the computer doing the orbit and attitude
activities could create major problems. We can't fully integrate software and hardware
until after we have integrated the payload and spacecraft bus. In addition, two different
groups usually handle the payload and spacecraft bus activities. The design and
manufacture of hardware and software may well occur in different areas following
different approaches. Putting these functions together in a single computer greatly increases cost and risk during the integration and test process, at a time when schedule
delays are extremely expensive.

----------------------------------------------------28

Mission Characterization

2.1

Another problem which can arise from time to time is incompatible functions, that
is, activities which do not work well together. One example would be sporadic,
computationally-intensive functions which demand resources at the same time.
Another example occurs when the initial processing of either spacecraft bus or payload
sensors may well be an interrupt-driven activity in which the computer is spending
most of its time servicing interrupts to bring in observational data. This could make it
difficult for the same computer to handle computationally-intensive processing
associated with higher-level activities. This can be accommodated either by having the
functions handled in separate computers or using a separate 110 processor to queue
data from the process with a large number of interrupts.
Finally, we must consider the groups who oversee different activities. Integration
and test of any computer and its associated software will be much more difficult if two
distinct groups develop software for the same computer. In this case, significant delays
and risks can occur. This does not necessarily mean, however, that elements controlled
by different groups cannot be accommodated in the same computer. One approach
might be to have two engineering groups be responsible for development of specifications and ultimately for testing. The detailed specifications are then handed over to a
single programming group which then implements them in a single computer. This
allows a single group to be responsible for control of computer resources. Thus, for
example, the orbit control and attitude control functions may be specified and tested
by different analysis groups. However, it may be reasonable to implement both
functions in a single computer by a single group of programmers.
2.1.2 Tasking, Scheduling, and Control

Tasking, scheduling, and control is the other end of the data-delivery problem. If
the purpose of our mission is to provide data or information, how do we decide what
information to supply, whom to send it to, and which resources to obtain it from?
Many of the issues are the same as in data delivery but with several key differences.
Usually, tasking and control involve very low data rates and substantial decision
making. Thus, we should emphasize how planning and control decisions are made
rather than data management
Tasking and scheduling typically occur in two distinct time frames. Short-term
tasking addresses what the spacecraft should be doing at this moment. Should FireSat
be recharging its batteries, sending data to a ground station, turning to look at a fire
over Yosemite, or simply looking at the world below? In contrast, long-term planning
establishes general tasks the system should do. For example, in some way the FrreSat
system must decide to concentrate its resources on northwestern Pacific forests for
several weeks and then begin looking systematically at forests in Brazil. During concept exploration, we don't need to know precisely how these decisions are made. We
simply wish to identify them and know broadly how they will take place.
On the data distribution side, direct downlink of data works well. We can process
data on board, send it simultaneously to various users on the ground, and provide a
low-cost, effective system. On the other hand, direct-distributed control raises serious
problems of tasking, resource allocation, and responsibility. The military community
particularly wants distributed control so a battlefield commander can control resources
to meet mission objectives. For FJreSat, this would translate into the local rangers
deciding how much resource to apply to fires in a particular area, including the surveillance resources from FJreSat. The two problems here are the limited aVailability of
resources in space and broad geographic coverage. For example, FrreSat may have

2.1

Step 3: Identifying Alternative Mission Concepts

limited power or data rates__II! eith~ case, if one regional office controls the system
for a time, they may use most or all of that resource. Thus, other users would have
nothing left. Also, FrreSat could be in a position to see fires in . Yosemite Park and
Alaska at the same time. So distributed control could create conflicts.
For most space systems, some level of centralized control is probably necessary to
determine how to allocate space resources among various tasks. Within this broad
resource allocation, however, we may have room for distributed decisions on what
data to collect and make available, as well as how to process it For example, the
remote fire station may be interested in information from a particular spectral band
which could provide clues on the characteristics of a particular fire. If this is an a~
priate option, the system must determine how to feed that request back to ~e satellite.
We could use a direct command, or, more likely, send a request for specific data to
mission operations which carries out the request
Spacecraft Autonomy. Usually, high levels of autonomy and independent operations occur in the cheapest and most expensive systems. The less costly srstems have
minimal tasking and control simply because they cannot afford the operations cost for
deciding what needs to be done. Most often, they continuously ~ on one of ~ ~ew
activities, such as recovering and relaying radio messagc:s or Co~tinuouslr transIDltting
an image of what is directly under the spacecraft. What IS done IS determined automatically on board to save money. In contrast, the most ~xpensive sys~~ have au!onomy
for technical reasons such as the need for a very rapId response (1D1SSile detection systems), or a problem ~fvery long command delays (interplanetary missions). Typically,
autonomy of this type is extremely expensive because the system must make complex,
reliable decisions and respond to change.
.
.
Autonomy can also be a critical issue for long missions and for constell~tions, ~
which cost and reliability are key considerations. For example, long-duration orbIt
maneuvers may use electric propulsion which is highly efficient, ~ut slow. (See
Chap. 17 for details.) Thruster firings are ordinarily controlled and morutored from ~e
ground, but electric propulsion maneuvers may take several months. B~use m~ru­
toring and controlling long thruster burns would cost too much, electric propulSIon
requires some autonomy.
.
As shown in Fig. 2-3, autonomy can add to mission reliability simply by redu~g
the complexity of mission operations. We may need to automa~ l~g~ constellati~ns
for higher reliability and lower mission-ope~tio~ cos!S. Mam~g the relative
positions between the satellites in a constellabon IS routine but reqwres many.co~­
putations. Thus, onboard automation-with monitoring and operator overnde if
necessary""'::'will give us the best results.
.
With the increased level of onboard processing available, it is clearly poSSIble to
create fully autonomous satellites. The question is, should we do so or should we
continue to control satellites predominantly from the ground?
.
Three main functions are associated with spacecraft c~trol: controlling !he
payload, controlling the attitude of the spacecraft and its appendages, an~ contro~g
the spacecraft orbit. Most space payloads and bus systems do not reqwre real-time
control except for changing mode or handling anomalies. Thus, the FJreSat payload
will probably fly rather autonomously until a command changes a mode or an anoma1!
forces the payload to make a change or raise a warning. Autonomous, or at least seIDlautonomous. payloads are reasonable for many satellites. There ~, of co~, exceptions such as Space Telescope, which is an ongoing series of ~xpenments being run by
different principal investigators from around the world. In this case, operators control

30

2.1

Mission Characterization

Traditional Approach

-

GroundSys

. halls

being
observed

Tlmeand
I.aokpolnI

Send
data

A!Iaohsd
to data

.....to

• Needs high accuracy to support long term

• OperaIIons intensive
• Look Point detennlned after the fact

orbit propagation
• Many opportunities for Communications or
0peraII0ns Errors

Autonomous Approach

I~H¥H

....... ~................

Send
data to

User

'------'

• AU intermediate steps occur In reaJ time

• Accuracy requirement c:an be reduced to
that needed for reaJ time support
• "DInIct to User" data flow Is both feasible &

economIcaJ

! DownllnJc data for !
:
_as_:
I!. __ .... _ .... _---_ .......... _-----"
Fig. 2-3. Comparison of Traditional vs. Autonomous Approach to SateUIte NavigaHon.
Use of autonomous operations may significantly reduce mission complexity and thereby Increase reliability.

the payload, but we would use some automatic operations to save money or to make
the operator's job easier.
Controlling the attitude of the spacecraft and its appendages is done autonomously
on board for nearly all satellites. Controlling the attitude from the ground is too expensive and too risky. The attitude control system on board most spacecraft provides
various attitude control modes and can work over extended periods with little or no
intervention from the ground.
Ground control has remained strongest in orbit maintenance and control, in which
virtually all thruster firings intended to change the orbit are set up and enabled by
ground command. This ground control will probably continue whenever large rocket
engines produce orbit maneuvers such as when a kick stage moves the satellite from a
parking orbit into a geosynchronous transfer orbit Once in their operational orbit,
however, many satellites either leave the orbit entirely uncontrolled or simply
maintain the orbit at a given altitude or within a given window. In this case, low-thrust
propulsion is both feasible and desirable because it is much less disturbing to the
normal spacecraft environment Low-thrust orbit maneuvers have been used on
geosynchronous spacecraft for a long time so normal satellite operations can continue
during the course of these stationkeeping maneuvers.
With low-thrust propulsion and current technology for autonomous navigation,
autonomous orbit control is cheap, easy, and inherently less risky than autonomous
attitude control. If the attitude control system stops working for even a short time, the
spacecraft can have various potential problems, inCluding loss of power, loss of
command, and pointing of sensitive payloads toward the Sun. In contrast, if we lose
low-thrust orbit control for a while, nothing disastrous happens to the spacecraft. The
spacecraft proceeds in its orbit drifting slowly out of its predefined position. This is
easily detected and corrected by the ground, assuming that the orbit control system
didn't fail completely.

31

Step 3: Identifying Alternative Mission Concepts

2.1

The major problem facing autonomous orbit control and, therefore, with autonomous satellites as a whole, is tradition. The ground does it mostly because it has always
been done that way. However, there are some" signs of change. Both UoSAT-l2 and
EO-l are planning experiments in autonomous orbit control and several of the lowEarth orbit communications constellations have baselined autonomous orbit control to
minimize both cost and risk.
Current satellite technology allows us to have fully autonomous, low-cost satellites.
Autonomy can reduce cost and risk while enabling mission operations people to do
what they do best-solve problems, handle anomalies, and make long-term decisions.
We believe fully autonomous satellites, including autonomous orbit maintenance, will
come about over the next decade as lower costs and risks, validated by on-orbit
experiments, begin to outweigh the value of tradition.
2.1.3 Mission Timeline
The mission timeline is the overall schedule from concept definition through
production, operations, and ultimately replenishment and end of life. It covers individual satellites and the whole system. Table 2-3 lists the mission timeline's main
parts and where they are discussed. Notice that two distinct, potentially conflicting,
demands can drive planning and production. One is the demand for a particular schedule or time by which the system must be operational. Thus, a Halley's Comet missi()n
depends on launching a satellite in time to rendezvous with the comet On the other
hand, funding constraints frequently slow the mission and cause schedule gaps which
add both further delays and cost Of course, funding constraints can affect much more
than timelines. They can determine whether we will do a mission, as well as its scope.
TABLE 2-3. Prlnclpel Elements of the Mission nmellne. Key milestones In the mission or
project timelfne can have a significant effect on how the space system Is designed
and operated.
Element

Typically Driven By

Where Discussed

Planning and
Development

Funding constraints
System need date

Sec. 12,

Production

Funding constraints
Technology davelopment
System need date

Chap. 12

Initial Launch

Launch avallabmty
System need date

Chap. 18

Constellation
Build-up

Production schedule
Launch availability
Satellite lifetime

Sec. 7.6.1

Normal Miss/on
Operallons

Planned operational life
Satenite lifetime (planned or failure constrained)

Chap. 14

Replenishment

Production schedule
Launch avaHabll1ty
Satellite lifetime (planned or faHure constrained)

Sec. 19.1

End-of·Life

Legal and poUtlcaJ constraints
Danger to other spacecraft

Sec. 21.1

Disposal

Chap. 1

32

MIssion .Cbaracterlzation

Step 4:.Identifyblg Alternative Mission Architectures

2.2

If the mission involves a constellation of satellites, a key timeline driver is the need
tohavethefoll constellation· up for most of the satellite's lifelime. If a single satellite
will last 5 years and we need a constellation of 50, we'll never get a full constellation
with a launch rate of 5 per year. If having the full constellation is important, we must
deploy the initial constellation within 20-25% of an individual satellite's lifetime.
This schedule allows some margin for almost inevitable stretch-out as difficulties arise
during the mission. If the constellation must remain complete, we need to plan for
regular replenishment of satellites. We can replenish on a predefined timeline as
satellites wear out or become technically obsolete, or we can respond to on-orbit
failures or other catastrophic events which ~'kill" a particular satellite.
Two areas of the mission timeline typically do not receive adequate attention
during concept exploration: performance with less than a full set of satellites while
building up the constellation, and end-of-life disposal. In a constellation of satellites
we would like to increase performance levels as we add satellites. If FrreSat is a constellation, we want to achieve some protection from fires with the first satellite launch
and more with each added launch until all satellites are in place. As described further
in Sec. 7.6, designers of constellations often concentrate only on the full constellation's. performance. However, the period of time before the constellation is brought
fully mto place can frequently be long and may well be a criJical phase since a large
fraction of the funding has been spent and yet full capability has not been achieved.
Thus it is particularly important for constellation design to take into account the problem of performance with less than a full set of satellites. In addition, we want graceful
degradation, so a satellite failure will still allow strong performance until we replace
the failed satellite. These issues are important during concept exploration because they
may significantly affect the design of the constellation and the entire system.
There is now growing concern with disposal of satellites after their useful life in
orbit. We have already recognized this need for geosynchronous satellites because the
geosynchronous ring is rapidly filling. But it is also very important for low-Earth orbit
constellations in which debris and spent satellites left in the pattern can threaten the
remaining constellation. Again, we must address this issue early in concept defmition.

TABLE 2-4.

Process Summary for Identifying Alternative Mission ArchHectures. This highly creativEt~ cart have a slgnifleant Impact on mission cost and complexity.

Step

Where Discussed

A. Identify the mission elements subject to trade.

Table 2-5

B. Identify the main options for each tradeable element

Table 2-6

. C. Construct a trade tree of avaDable options

~9.2-4,
able 2-7

D. Prune the trade tree by eliminating unrealistic combinations.
E. Look for other alternatives which could substantially Influence how
we do the mission.

Chap. 22

Usually this step greatly reduces the number of tradeable elements. Table 2-5 summarizes this process for FIreSat. The FrreSat mission has multiple options that will affect
not only cost but also performance, flexibility, and long-term mission utility. Thus, for
this mission we shoUld carry through several different options so the decision-making
audience can understand the main alternatives.
TABLE 2-5.

Selecting FlreSat Elements Which can be li'aded. Many options exist for FireSat,
not all of which are compatible with each other.

Element of Mission
ArchHecture

Can be
Traded

Reason

Mission Concept

Yes

Want to remain open to alternative approaches

Subject

No

Passive subject Is well defined

Payload

Yes

Can select complexity and frequencies

Spacecraft Bus

Yes

Multiple options based on scan mechanism and power

Launch System

Cost only

Choose minimum cost for selected orbit

Orbit

Yes

Options are low, medium, or high altitude with varying
number of satellites

Ground System

Yes

Could share NOAA control facUlty, use dedicated
FireSat facility, or direct downlink to users

Communications
Architecture

No

FIxed by mission operations and ground system

Mission Operations

Yes

Can adjust level of automation

2.2 Step 4: Identifying Alternative Mission Architectures
A mission architecture consists of a mission concept plus a specific set of options
for the eight mission elements defined in Sec. 1.2. Although we need all of the
elements to define and evaluate a mission architecture, some are more critical than
others in determining how the space mission will meet its objectives. Typically, we
define a mission architecture by specifying the mission concept plus the subject, orbit,
communications architecture, and ground system. These provide a framework for
defining the other elements. Alternatively, we may define the architecture by specifying a unique approach to mission operations or a unique payload which then drives the
definition of the remaining elements
Our goal is to arrive at a set of candidate architectures for further evaluation large
enough to encompass all approaches offering significant advantages, but small enough
to make the more detailed definition and evaluation manageable. Table 2-4 summarizes the mechanism for doing this, which we describe below.
~tep~. !dentify the mission elements subject to trade. We begin by examining our
basIC IDlSSlon concept and each of the eight mission elements in light of the requirements and constraints from Sec. 1.4 to determine which have more than one option'.

33

Table 2-5 lists one of the options as "Cost only:' meaning that the trade depends
mainly on cost and only secondarily on how or how well the mission is accomplished.
An example would be the launch system, for which the main concern normally is what
launch vehicle will get the spacecraft into orbit at the lowest cost. Still, these trades
may be important in selecting the mission concept. For example, a major increase in
the launch cost may outweigh being able to use a smaller number of identical satellites
in a higher orbit
Step B. Identify the main options for each tradeable element. Although in theory we
have almost an unlimited·number of options, we normally draw them from a limited
set such as those in Table 2-6. Thus, we frrst choose options that apply to our mission
and then look for special circumstances which may lead us to consider alternatives not
listed in the table.

34

Mission Characterization

TABLE 2-6. Common Alternatives for Mission Elements. ThIs table serves as a broad
checklist for Identifying the main alternatives for mission architectures.
Mission
Element [Where
DIscussed]
MIssion Concept
[Sec. 2.11

ControDable
Subject [Sees.
2.3, 13.4, 22.31

Passive Subject
[Sec. 2.31

OptIon
Area

Most Common
OptIons

FIreSat
Options

Discussed]

OptIon
Area
ExIsting or
dedicated

Most Common
OptIons

Ground System
[Chap. 15)

Tasking

Ground commanding, autonomous tasking,
simple operations (no tasking required)

Communications T1mefiness
Store and dump, real-time fink
ArchItecture
Control
Single or multiPle ground stations, direct to
[Chap. 13)
anddeta
user, user commanding, commercial finks
dissemination

Selection

Standard ground stations, private TV
receivers, ship or aircraft transceivers,
special purpose equipment

Performance

EIRP, G/T (See 13.3 for definitions)

Steering

fixed or tracking

What is to be

Subject itseH, thermal environment,
em/Ued radiation, contrast with
surroundings

Heat or visible nght;
chemical composition;particles

Communlcalions: normal bands
Observations: IR, visible, microwave
Radar: L, C, S bands, UHF

IR, visible

Single or multiPle frequency bands,
single or multIple Instruments

Single or
multiple bands
Aperture

sensed

NlA
[See Sec. 9.31

Sizevs.
sensitivity

SrneD aperture with high power
(or sensitivity) or vice versa

Spacecraft Bus
[Chap. 10]

Propulsion

Whether needed; cold gas, monopropellant, Determined
blpropenant
by definition of
payload and orbit

Orbit control

Whether needed, onboard vs. ground

Navigation

Onboard (GPS or other) vs. ground-based

Attitude deter- None, splnntng, 3-axis; articulated
mlnatlon and payload vs. spacecraft pointing;
control
actuators and sensors
Power

Soler vs. nuclear or other; body-mounted vs.
1- or 2-axis pointed arrays

Launch
vehicle

SSLV, Atlas, Della, STS, Titan,
Pegasus, Ariane, other foreign

Upper stage

Pam-D, IUS, TOS, Centaur, integral
propulsion, other foreign

Launch site

Kennedy, Vandenberg, Kourou, other foreign

Special orbits

None, geosynchronous, Sun-synchronous,
frozen, Molnlye, repeating ground track

Altitude

Low-Earth orbit, mlcl-altitude,
geosynchronous

Inclination

0°,28.5°,57",63.4°,90°,98"

Constellation
configuration

Number of sateDites; Walker pattem,
other patterns; number of orbit planes

Datarmined by
definition of spacecraft and orbit

SlngleGEO
satellite, lOw-Earth
consteDation

Min. inclination dependent on altitude

FlreSat
Options

AFSCN, NASA control center, other shared Shared NOAA
system, dedicated systam
system, dedicated
system

.

Payload

Orbit
[Chaps. 6, 7]

Mission
Element [Where

Direct downnnk to user, automated ground Direct downlink or
processing, man-In-the-Joop processing and through mission
transmission
control
Simple operation or
ground commands

35

TABLE 2-6. Common Alternatives for Mission Elements. (Continued) This table serves as a
broad checklist for identifying the main alternatives for mission architectures.

Data delivery

Payload
Frequency
[Chaps. 9, 131
(some llems may
not apply,
Complexity
depending on
mission type)

Launch System
[Chap. 181

Step 4: Identifying Alternative Mission Architectures

2.2

Mission
Operetions
[Chap. 14)

EIther option
1 ground station;
commercial or
direct date transfer

Relay
mechanism

TDRSS, satellite-to-sateOite crossnnks,
commercial communications relay

TORS or
commercial

Automation
level

Fully automated ground stations, part-time
operations, fuD-tIme (24-11r) operations

Any of the
options itsted

Autonomy
level

FuR ground command and control,
parllal autonomy, fuR autonomy
(not yet readily avaDable)

Steps C and D. Construct and prune a trade !Tee. of. av~ilable optio~. ~~g
identified options we next construct a trade tree which, m Its snnplest form, 18 a listing
of all possible combinations of mission options. Mechanically, i~ is easy to create a ~
of all combinations of options identified in Step B. As a practical matter, such a list
would get unworkably long for most missions. As we construct the trade tree we need
to find ways to reduce the number of combinations without eliminating options that
may be important
The first step in reducing the number of options is to identify the system drivers (as
discussed in Sec. 2.3) and put them at the top of the trade tree. The system drivers are
parameters or characteristics that largely determine the system's cost and performance. They are at the top of the trade tree because they normally dominate the design
process and mandate our choices for other elements, thus greatly reducing our options.
The second step in reducing options is to look for trades that are at least somewhat
independent of the overall concept definition or which will ~ d~termined by the
selection of other elements. For example, the spacecraft bus ordinarily has many key
options. However, once we have defined the orbit and payload, we can select the
spacecraft bus that meets the mission requirements at the lowest cost. Again, although
bus options may not be in the trade tree, they may playa key role in selecting workable
mission concepts because of cost, risk, or schedule.
The third tree-pruning technique is to examine the tree as we build it and retain only
sensible combinations. For example, nearly any launch vehicle above a minimum size
will work for a given orbit imd spacecraft. Because cost is the main launch-vehicle
trade, we should retain in the trade tree only the lowest-cost launch vehicle that will
fulfill the mission. This does not mean that we will ultimately launch the spacecraft on
the vehicle listed in the trade tree. Instead, we should design the spacecraft to be compatible with as many launch vehicles as pOssible and then select the vehicle based on
cost (which may well have changed) when we are deciding about initial deployment
Steps C and D produCe a trade tree such as the one for F"rreSat in Fig. 2-4. Our ~oaI
is to retain a small number of the most promising options to proceed to more detailed

-----------------------------

-

MIssion Characterization

Step 5: Identifying System Drivers

definition. For each option we will have selected most, though not necessarily all, of
the elements shown itrTable 2-7 for options 1 and 6. Of course we should reevaluate
the trade tree from time to time as the system becomes more completely defined.

I

may allow major performance improvements or cost reductions. For example, as an
alternative mission concept we could detect forest fires by using small sensors spread
throughout the forests being monitored and simply use the satellite system to interrogate the sensors and provide the data to the users. Chapter 22 further explores this
low-cost alternative. The key point is that alternatives nearly ~ways exist. We must
look carefully for them and be willing to revise normal requirements and constraints
to meet our fundamental mission objectives.

I

2.3 Step 5: Identifying System Drivers

36

Low Earth

Olblt

Geosynchronous

orbit

I

I
Comm.
An:h.

TORS

(Downlink)

I

I i
I I

Commarclal

Commercial

Launch

Pegasus

Pegasus

Op/ionNo.

DIrecl

Stom&

Comm.
An:h.
(to User)

Fig. 2-4.

Large Aperture IR

SmaO Aperture IR

Pay/oB.d

(1)

I

I

n

I

~

Commercial

Shared

Shared

STS

STS

STS

STS

TOS

Integral
Propulsion

TOS

Integral
Propulsion

Shared

(2)

(3)

(4)

Shared

(5)

(6)

FlreSat Trade Tree. Only some of the launch options are Hsted. Other mission
elements are largely Independent of the trade tree options. The goal Is to create drastically different options for comparison.

TABLE 2·7. TWo of the Six Preliminary FlreSat Mission Concepts. See the trade tree In
Rg. 2-4 for the other options.
Element

Option 1

Option 6

Mission Concept

IR detection of fires with results
put on a map and transmitted

IR detection of fires with results put
on a map and transmitted

Subject

Characteristics defined by
the specification

Characteristics defined by the
specification

Payload

Small-aperture IR

Large-aperture IR

Spacecraft Bus

Small, 3-axls

Mid-size, 3-axIs

Launch System

Pegasus

STS, integral propulsion

Orbit

Low-Earth, 2 satellites,
2 perpendicular polar planes

Geosynchronous, 1 satellite
centered over west coast of U.S.

Ground System

Single, dedicated ground station

Single, dedicated ground station

Communications

TORS data downOnk;
commercial Dnks to users

Direct to station; results relayed
to users via RreSat

Architecture

Mission Operations Continuous during fire season,
partIa/ otherwise

Continuous during fire season,
partial otherwise

Step E. Look for other alternatives. Defining alternative architectures cannot be
purely mechanical. For nearly any mission, we may find new and better ways of doing
anything the basic elements do. A new, low-cost launch vehicle may dramatically
change the available design alternatives. Alternative definitions of the subject or user

37

System drivers are the principal mission parameters or characteristics which influence performance, cost, risk, or schedule and which the user or designer can control.
For example, the temperature at which a forest fire burns may heavily influence how
easily it can be detected; however, this is beyond the system designer's control and.
therefore, is not a system driver. Correctly identifying the key system drivers is a critical step in mission analysis and design. Misidentifying system drivers is one of the
most common causes of mission analysis error. For example. we may focus a lot of
time and effort on getting the most coverage for an orbit when the system's ultimate
peJionnance depends mainly on data rates or cloud cover.
Table 2-8 lists the most common system drivers for space missions, along with
what limits them, what they limit, and where they are discussed. The table helps us
ensure that we do not overlook system drivers. In identifying these drivers we must
clearly determine whether we are looking for drivers of performance, cost, risk, or
schedule. These may be the same or different. To identify system drivers, we:
1. Identify the Area ofInterest
Explicitly identify the area of interest, typically perfonnance, cost, risk, or
schedule.
2. Identify Parameters Which Measure the Area ofInterest
Define numerical parameters which measure the identified area of interest. (See
Sec. 3.4 on measures of effectiveness and perfonnance parameters for more
details on how to do this.) The important point is to find parameters which genuinely measure the goal rather than ones which simply are easy to compute.
3. Develop First-Order Algorithms
Develop a fonnula or algorithm to express the first-order estimate for the value
of the parameter identified above. This could include either system algorithms
as defined in Sec. 3.1, or unique algorithms for the identified parameter. (See
Table 2-9 for the FrreSat example.)
4. Examine the Factors
Examine each of the factors in the expression identified above. Those which can
be adjusted and which have the strongest effect on results are the system drivers.
5. Lookfor Possible "Hidden Drivers"
Examine each of the first-order algorithms for implicit variables or for factors
affecting more than one characteristic. For example, altitude will influence
the ground resolution of a given instrument, the area covered by the field of
view, and the spacecraft's velocity relative to the Earth. Therefore, it will more
strongly influence effective area search rates than a single formula may show.

38

Mission Characterization

2.4

TABLE 2-8. Common System Drivers. System drivers can frequently be Identified by examinIng the parameters In this Dst.
Driver
SIze

On-orblt Weight

What Umlts Driver
Shroud or bay size,
available weight,
aerodynamic drag
Altitude, Incrmatlon,
launch vehicle

What DrIver Umlts
Payload size (frequently antenna
diameter or aperture)

Payload weight, survlvabrnty; largely
determines design and
manufacturing cost
Power
Size, weight (control
Payload & bus design, system
Is secondary problem) sensitivity, on-orblt lHe
Data rate
Storage, processing, Information sent to user; can push
antenna sizes, limits demand for onboard processing
of ex/sting systems
Communications Coverage, availability Coverage, timeDness, ability to
of ground stations or command
relay satellites
POinting
Cost, weight
Resolution, geolocation, overall system accuracy; pushes spacecraft cost
Number of
Cost
Coverage frequency, and overlap
---Spacecraft
AltJtude
Launch vehicle,
Perlonnance,sunnvabDlty,coverage
perlormance
Onstantaneous and rete),
demands, weight
communications
Coverage
Orbit, scheduDng,
Data frequency and continuity,
(geometry
payload field of view maneuver requirements
and timing)
& observation time
Scheduling
T1mellne & operations, Coverage, responsiveness,
decision making,
mission utirtty
communications
Operations
Cost, crew size,
Frequently principal cost driver,
communications
principal error source, pushes
demand for autonomy (can also
save "losf missions)

Where
Discussed
Chaps.
9,10

Sec. 10.4.1

2.4

Sec. 7.2,
Chap. 13

Sec! 5.4

Sees.
7.2,7.6

Sees.
3.3,7.1,
7.4,7.6

Sees.
5.2,7.2

Sec. 3.2.4,
Chap. 14
Chap. 14

The way we have defined our particular problem, or which parameters are available
to us, may affect our list of system drivers. Thus, defining system drivers depends in
part on the physical and technical nature of the problem and in part on the constraints
imposed on the mission analyst Usua11y, we want to make these constraints explicit,
so we will know which variables are available for adjustment and which are assumed
to be given. Table 2-9 shows the major performance drivers for FJreSat

2.4 Step 6: Characterizing the Mission Architecture
. Once we have established alternative mission concepts, architectures, and system
drivers, we must further define the mission concepts in enough detail to aIlow
meaningful evalnations of effectiveness. For concept exploration, the steps in this
process correspond to the space mission elements. Figure 2-5 illustrates the sequence
of ac~vities and shows schematically the major interactions between the steps, as well
as prunary trade study areas and their interactions with main elements of the process.
The steps are described below and summarized in Table 2-10.

39.

TABLE 2-9. Identification of Performance Drivers for FlreSat. Arst-order algorithms are
given to BI10w us to estimate the performance drivers. Definition of performance
drivers may change as we create more detaDed definitions of the system and system algorithms. Comparison of columns two and three shows that the performance
drivers may depend on the mission concept used.
Key
Parameters

FIrst Order Algorithm
(Low-Earth Orbit)

FIrst Order Algorithm
(Geosynchronous)

Performance
Drivers

(Number of spacecraft)!
12 hr

Scan frequency

Number of spacecraft
for low orbit

T/meLate

Onboard storage delay +
processing time

Communications +
processing time

Siorage delay
(If appUcable)

Resofutlon

Distance x[(wavelength/
aperture) + control error]

Distance x[(wavelength/
aperture) + control error]

AltItude, aperture,
control accuracy

Observalfon
Gap

Cloud cover Interval or
coverage gap

Cloud cover Interval or
coverage gap

None
(weather dominated)

Observation

Frequency
Secs.
10.2, 11.4
Sec. 13.3

Step 6: Characterizing the Mission Architecture

TABLE 2-10. Summary of the Concept Characterization Process. See text for details. See
Ag.2-5 for a typical process flow.

Step
A Define the preUrn/nary mission concept
Define the subject characteristics
Determine the orbit or constellation characteristics
Determine payload size and perlormance
Select the mission operations approach
• Communications architecture
• Operations
• Ground system
F Design the spacecraft bus to meet payload, orbit, and
communications requirements
G Select a launch and orbit transfer systam
H Determine deployment, logistics, and end-of-1He strategies
I Provide costing support
J Document and Iterate
B
C
0
E

Where Discussed
Chap. 2
Chap. 9
Chap. 7
Chap. 9,13
Chap. 13
Chap. 14
Chap. 15
Chap. 10
Chap. 18
Sees.7.6,19.1,21.2
Chap. 20
Chap. 20

A. Define the Preli.mintuy Mission Concept (Chapter 2)
As described in Sec. 2.1, the key elements are data delivery; tasking, scheduling,
and control; communications architecture; and mission timeline. We begin with a
broad concept and refine this concept as we define the various mission elements in the
steps below. (See Tables 2-1 and 2-2 for a further definition of these elements and how
to define them.)
B. Define the Subject Characteristics (Chapter 9)
We can divide space missions into two broad categories. One services other system
elements, typically on the user premises, such as Comsat ground stations or GPS
navigation .receivers. The other category senses elements that are not a part of the
mission system, such as the clouds observed by weather satellites. Our first step in defining the system elements (Chap. 9) is to determine the subject's key characteristics.

40

Mission Characterization

2.4

Step 6: Characterizing the Mission Architecture

2.4

41

''receiver'' to characterize, and the effective isotropic radiated power (EIRP) specification for the trailsmitter is replaced by definition of the object's emission intensity as
a function of bandwidth. Table 2-11 summarizes the characteristics of both types of
elements.
TABLE 2-11.
DafIn9 PreIIm!nary MIssIon Canoopt
• DaIs CraaIIon & FIlM

• _TImsIlne

Summary of MaIn Characteristics of Space MIssion Subjects. See Chap. 13
for definitions of communications parameters.
.

Step A

Controllable Subjects
1. Quantity
2. Location or range

2. location or range

3. Transmitter EIRP

3. Emission intensity CN/sr) as a function of frequency or

4. Receiver G/T
5. Frequency and baI'IdwIdth

DafIn9 0!IIIIIC0nsIaIJ EIemenI

:~~~

• Number of Spacacmft
• lmmch System PalIormance Raq.
• $ysIBm CosIImpJIoaIIons
• Spm:acmft, P/L En'IiranmenIs

Step C

PessIve Subjects
1. Quantity

spectraJ band
4. Needed temporal coverage (duty cycle)

6. Duty cycle

C. Determine the Orbit and Constellotion Choracteristies (Chapter 7)
The mission orbit profoundly influences every part of space mission development
and operation. Combined with the number of spacecraft, it determines all aspects of
space-ta-ground and ground-to-space sensor and communication coverage. For the
most part, the orbit determines sensor resolution, transmitter power, and data rate. The .
orbit determines the spacecraft environment ana. for military spacecraft, strongly
influences survivability. Fmally, the orbit determines the size. and cost of the launch
and delivery system.
Chapter 7 gives detailed directions for orbit design. As Table 2-12 shows, the
design should include parameters for the mission and transfer orbits, propellant
requirements, and constellation characteristics.

D. Determine the Payload Size and Perfornumce (Chapters 9 and 13)

FIg. 2-5.

Process for Characterizing tint Mission Architecture. See Table 2-10 for steps.

If a mission interacts with user equipment. we must define the subject characteristics
~ither .from known information for well-established services or by a trade study
mvolvmg the rest of the system. The parameters for specifying passive subjects are
largely the same as those for specifying user elements, except that we don't have a

We next use the subject characteristics from Step 2 and orbit characteristics from
Step 3 to create a mission payload concept. We can divide most mission payloads into
six broad categories: observation or sensing, communications, navigation, in situ sampling and observations, sample return, and crew life support and transportation. More
than 90% of current space-system payloads observe, sense, or communicate. Even the
navigation payloads are basically communications payloads with ancillary data
processing and stable time-base equipment to provide the navigation signal. Detailed
directions for sizing and definition appear in Chap. 9 for observation payloads and in
Chap. 13 for communications payloads. Table 2-13 summarizes the key parameters
we need to specify.
System-level payload trades typically involve the user element. selecting a mission
orbit. and allocating pointing and tracking functions between the payload and spacecraft elements. User element trades involve balancing the performance of the payload
and elements on the user's premises to get the lowest overall system cost for a given
orbit and constellation design. As an example, if a single geosynchronous spacecraft
must service thousands of ground stations, as for direct broadcast TV, we would minimize the system cost by selecting a large, powerful spacecraft that can broadcast to
simple and inexpensive ground stations. A system designed for trunklioe communication between half a dozen ground stations uses more complex and capable ground
systems and saves cost with simpler spacecraft.

42

Mission Characterization

2.4

TABLE 2-12. Summary of Orbit and Constellation Characteristics. See text for discussion.
1 AltItude
2 Incnnatlon
3 Eccentricity

4 Argument of perigee for nonclrcular orbits

5 l1V budget for orbit transfer
6 l1V budget for orbit maintenance

7 Whether orbit will be controlled or uncontrolled

8 Number and relative orientation of orbit planes (constellations)
9 Number and spacing of spacecraft per orbit plana (consteHations)

TABLE 2-13. Summary of MissIon-Payload Characteristics. For multiple payloads, we must
determine parameters for each payload.
1. Physical Parameters
1.1 Envelope dimensions
1.2 Mass properties

2. Viewing and Pointing
2.1 Aperture size and shape
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5

Size and orientation of clear field of view required
PrimaJy pointing dlrectlon*
PoIntIng direction range and accuracy required
Tracking or scanning rate

2.6 Pointing or tracking duration and duty cycle
3. Electrical Power
3.1 VoHage
3.2 Average and peak power
3.3 Peak power duty cycle
4. Telemetry and Commands

4.1 Number of commend and telemetry channels
4.2 Commend memory size and time resolution
4.3 Data rates or quantity of data
5. Thermal Control

5.1 Temperature Omits (operatlnglnon-operatlng)
5.2 Heat rejection to spacecraft (average/peak wattage/duty cycle)
*e.g., Sun, star, nadir, ground target, another spacecraft

Payload vs. orbit trades typically try to balance the resolution advantages of low
altitudes against the fewer spacecraft needed for the same coverage at higher altitudes.
The counterbalancing factor is that we need a sensor with a larger aperture and better
sensitivity to obtain the same resolution at higher altitudes; the more capable sensor
costs more and needs a larger spacecraft and launch system.

2.4

Step 6: Characterizing the Mission Arcbitecture

43

Payload vs. spacecraft trades usually try to meet pointing and tracking requirements
at the lowest cost. At one extreme, the payload does all the pointing independently of
the spacecraft attitude; an example is the use of gimballed scan platforms on the JPL
Mariner MK-ll spacecraft. At the opposite extreme, Space Telescope and Chandra
X-Ray Observatory point the entire spacecraft with the required level of accuracy. An
intermediate approach used on RME points the entire spacecraft to a lower level of accuracy, allowing the payload to do fine pointing over a limited field of regard.·

E. Select the Mission Operations Approach (Chapters 13-15)
We next select and size the elements needed to support communications and c0ntrol of the spacecraft and payload. Table 2-14 gives the key parameters. Typically a
mission operations control center commands and controls the spacecraft and delivers
data to the user. With rare exceptions, we would choose an existing control renter,
based on the user's needs, downlink data rates, and, in some cases, security considerations. Both NASA and the Air Force have existing systems. Particular institutions,
such as Intelsat or Comsat, use custom systems. Most commercial operators employ
system-peculiar control centers. If needed, we can interconnect most systems withdifferent options for relaying communications. Chapter 15 details the specification,
selection, and design of this element.
TABLE 2-14. Summary of Mission Operations CharacteristIcs.
1. Communications Architecture
1.1 Number and distribution of ground stations
1.2 Downnnk and upUnk path design
1.3 Crossnnk characteristics, Hused
1.4 Relay satenltes used
1.5 Communications link budget
1.6 Space-to-ground data rates

2. Ground System
2.1 Use of existing or dedicated faciDties
2.2 Required transmit and receive characJerlstics
2.3 Required data handUng
3. Operations
3.1 Level of automation
3.2 Software lines of code to be created
3.3 Fun-time or part-time staffing
3.4 Number of personnel
3.5 Amount of commanding required
3.6 Timeliness of data distribution

The communications architecture transfers the required mission data (payload and
housekeeping data) from the spacecraft down to the mission operations control center.
In addition, we must send commands back to the spacecraft, and meet other requirements such as encryption. Thus, we select the communications relay elements along
with the mission control system after most payload and orbit trades are complete.
Typical options are SGLS for Air Force missions or IDRSS/GSIDN with the NASA
mission control centers. Custom systems are required for some applications and are
commonly used for· commercial missions in geosynchronous orbit. Chapter 13
describes communications architectures, and Chap. 14 treats operations.

44

Mission Characterization

2.4

F. Design the Spacecraft to Meet Paylotul, Orbit, and Communications
Requ~nwnU(~url0)

The spacecraft and its subsystems support the payload in the mission orbit-point
it and supply power. command and data handling. and thermal control. They must be
compatible with the communications architecture and mission-operations concept.
These elements. along with the launch system. drive the spacecraft design. We usually
choose the launch system that costs the least to place the minimum required weight in
the mission or transfer orbit. Once we make this selection. the spacecraft·s stowed
configuration is constrained by the shroud volume of the selected vehicle or vehicles.
Table 2-15 summarizes the items we need to specify while defining the spacecraft.
Chapter 10 covers how we synthesize spacecraft concepts and their definition and
sizing.
TABLE 2-15.

Summary of Spacecraft Characteristics. See text for discussion.

1. General arrangement including payload fields of view (deployed and stowed)
2. Functional block diagram
3. Mass properties, by mission phase (mass and moments of inertia)
4. Sumrmuy of subsystem characteristics
4.1 Bectrical power (conversion approach; array and battery size; payload power
avaDable, average/peak overaD spacecraft power, orbit average, peak)
4.2 Attitude control (attitude determination and control components; operating modes;
ranges and pointing accuracy)
4.3 Navigation and orbit control (accessing requirement, use of GPS; onboard vs. ground)
4.4 Telemetry and command (commandltelemetry format; command and time resolution;
telemetry storage capacity; number of channels by type)
4.5 Computer (speed and memory; data architecture)
4.6 Propulsion (amount and type of propellant; thruster or motor sizes)
4.7 Communications (link margins for all links; command uplink data rate; telemetry
downlink data rates)
4.8 Primary structure and deployables
4.9 Unique thermal requirements
4.10 Timing (resolution and accuracy)
5. System parameters
5.1 Lifetime and reliability

52 Level of autonomy

A key spacecraft-versus-Iaunch-system trade is the use of integral propulsion.
Many commercial spacecraft ride the launch system to transfer orbit and then insert
themselves into the mission orbit using an internal propulsion or an internal stage.
Some DoD spacecraft. such as DSCS m and DSP. depend on a launch system with an
upper stage for insertion directly into the mission orbit. They do not carry large
integral propulsion subsystems. We should consider this trade whenever the spacecraft and payload cost enough to justify the reliability offered by an expensive upper
stage.

2.4

Step 6: Characterizing the Mission Arcbitecture

45

Another trade between the spacecraft and launch system involves guidance of the
upper stage. Often. the spacecraft contro1 system can gui~ the u~per stage. which may
allow deletion of equipment from that stage, thereby mcr~mg perfo~c~ .and
lowering cost. This trade is particularly important when usmg three-axts-stabilized
stages.

G. Select a Launch and Orbit Transfer System (Chapter 18)
.
The launch system and its upper stage need to deliver the spacecraft and payl~~ to
the mission orbit or to a transfer orbit from which the spacecraft can reach the lDlSSlon
orbit on its own. The chosen launch system usually determines the launch site. The
launch site organization provides pre-launch processing, checkout, and installation to
the launch system, usually on the launch pad.
Launch vehicles and upper stages may be combined in many ways to match ~most
any reasonable combination of payload and mission orbit. Chapter 18 de~s the
characteristics and selection of launch systems. Selecting a launch system typIcally
involves the trades with the spacecraft discussed above. In addition, we ~ust decide
between a single spacecraft launch and manifesting two or more spa~ecraft m a shared
launch. In general, multiple manifesting costs less, but constratns the sched~e.
Finally, we should bring certain launch-system parameters to the s~stem level desIgn
process: type of vehicle, cost per launch, and flow times for processmg and prelaunch
activities at the launch site.

H. Determine Logistics, Deploynwnt, Replenishment, and Spacecraft Disposal
Strategies (Sections 7.6, 19.1, and 21.2)
. .
. .
Logistics is the process of planning to supply and mamtain the space lDlSSlon over
time. Whereas only· military missions typically demand fo~al pl~s~ the ~
described in Sec. 19.1 can strongly affect costs for any multi-year lDlSSlon reqwnng
extended support. Historically, most life-cycle costs have been locked in ~y the end of
concept exploration, so we must evaluate operations, support, replemshment, and
.
mechanisms during this phase.
. ..
Planners often overlook the sequence for building up and mamtainmg satellite
constellations. To deploy a constellation effectively, we must create performan~
plateaus which allow us to deploy in stages and to degrade the system gracefully If
individual satellites fail. These performance plateaus develop from the constellation
design. as described in Sec. 7.6.
.
.
.
.
Section 21.2 describes the ever-increasing problem assOCIated WIth orb,tal debns,
consisting of defunct satellites and associated parts. B.eca~ of.this proble~, all new
satellite designs should plan for deorbiting or otherwise disposmg of satelhtes at the
end of their useful life. In particular, satellites must be removed from areas such as the
geostationary ring, where they would seriously threaten other spacecraft or any lowEarth orbit constellation.

I. Provide Costing Support for the Concept-Definition Activity. (Chapter. 20)
Developing costs for system elements is vital to two objectives: fmding the best
individual mission architecture and comparing mission architectures at the system
level. Chapter 20 describes parametric, analogous, and bottoms-up methods for
costing. Typically, for concept exploration. we use o~y the first two ~use w~ lack
a detailed definition of the design. At this level, we sunply want relative.compansons
rather than absolute· estimates, so we can accept the greater uncertainty m these
methods.

46

Mission Characterization

2.4

References
Agrawal, Brij N. 1986. Design ofGeosynchronous Spacecraft. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.

Chapter 3

Boden, Daryl G. and Wiley J;Larson. 1996. Cost Effective Space Mission Operations.
New York: McGraw-HilI.

Mission Evaluation

Davidoff, Martin. 1998. Radio Amateur's Satellite Handbook. Newington, CT: American Radio Relay League.
Eckart, Peter. 1996. Spaceflight Life Support and Biospherics. Torrance, CA: Microcosm Press and Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Elbert, Bruce R. 1987. Introduction to Satellite Communication. Boston: Artech
. House Publishers.
Elbert, Bruce R. 1996. The Satellite Communication Applications Handbook. Boston:
Artech House Publishers.
. Griffin, M. and J.R. French. 1991. Space Vehicle Design. Washington. DC: AIAA.
London, J.R. 1994. LEO on the Cheap-Methodsfor Achieving Drastic Reductions in
Space Launch Costs. Maxwell AFB, AL: Air University Press.
Lu, Ning. 1997. Fractal Imaging. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Pisacane, VL. and R.C. Moore. 1994. Fundomentals of Space Systems. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Sayood, Khalid. 1996. Introduction to Data Compression. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufman Publishers.
Wall, Stephen D. and Kenneth W. Ledbetter. 1991. Design of Mission Operations
Systems for Scientific Remote Sensing. London: Taylor & Francis.
Wertz, James R. and Wiley J. Larson. 1996. Reducing Space Mission Cost. Torrance, CA: Microcosm Press and Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Woodcock, Gordon R. 1986. Space Stations and Platforms. Malabar, Fl.: Orbit Book
Company.

James R. Wertz, Microcosm, Inc.
3.1 Step 7: Identification of Critical Requirements
3.2 Mission Analysis
The Mission Analysis Hierarchy; Studies with Limited
Scope; Trade Studies; Performance Assessments
3.3 Step 8: Mission Utility
Performance Parameters and Measures of Effectiveness:
Mission Utility Simulation; Commercial Mission Analysis
and Mission Utility Tools
3.4 Step 9: Mission Concept Selection

Chapter 2 defined and characterized alternative concep~. and architec~ for
space missions. This chapter shows how we evaluate the a~ility. of these OptiO~ to
meet fundamental mission objectives. We address how to Identify the key reqwrements which drive the system design. how to quantify mission performance, and how
to select one or more concepts for further development or to decide that we cannot
achieve the mission within current constraints or tecbnology.
Although essentially all missions go through mission evaluation and analysis stages
many times, there are relatively few discussions in the literature of the gen~raI p~
for doing this. Fortescue and Stark [1995] discuss the process for genenc mISSIOnS;
Przemieniecki [1993, 1994] does so for defense missions; and Shishko [1~5} pr0vides an excellent overview for NASA missions. Kay [1995} discusses the dIfficulty
of doing this within the framework of a political democracy and Wertz and Larson
[1996] provide specific techniques applicable to reducing mission cost
The key mission evaluation questions for FireSat are:
• Which FireSat requirement dominates the system design or is the most difficult or expensive to meet?
• How weII can FIreSat detect and monitor forest fires, and at what cost?
• Should the FireSat mission evaluation proceed. and if so, which alternatives
should we pursue?
We must readdress these questions as we analyze and design the space mission. By
addressing them when we fIrst explore concepts, we cannot obtain definitive :mswers.
But we can form the right questions and identify ideas, parameters, and reqwrements
we should be monitoring throughout the design. More extensive discussions of this
systems engineering process are provided by Rechtin [1991} and the System Engineer-

47

48

Mission Evaluation

3.1

ing ~ana?ement [Defense ~ystems Manage~ent College, 1990]. The NASA Systems
Engmeenng Handbook [ShlShko, 1995} proVIdes an excellent and detaIled account of
the process used by NASA. Przemieniecki [1990a, b] provides a good introduction to
mathematical methods associated with military programs and has an associated
software package. Other software packages intended specifically to support mission
evaluation include Satellite Tool Kit (STK) from Analytical Graphics (1998) the Mission Utility/Systems Engineering module (MUSE) from Microcosm (1998) and the
Edge product family from Autometric (1998).
'

3.1 Step 7: Identification of Critical Requirements
Critical requirements are those which dominate the space mission's overall design
and, therefore, most strongly affect performance and cost... ·For a manned mission to
Mars, the critical requirements will be clear: get to Mars all of the required mass to
expl?re the planet and return, and maintain crew safety for a long mission in widely
~aryIng e~V1ronments. For less ambitious space missions, we cannot establish the critIC~ .requrrements so easilr. B~cause we want to achieve the best performance at
mInImum cost, we need to Identify these key requirements as early as possible so they
can be a part of the trade process.
Table 3-1 lists the mos~ common criti~ req~ments, the areas they typically
aff~t, and where they are dISCussed. There IS no SIngle mechanism to find the critical
reqUIrements for any particular mission. Like the system drivers discussed in Sec. 2.3
they may be a function of the mission concept selected. Consequently once w~
establish the alternative mission concepts, we usually can determine the critical
req~rements by inspection. Often, concept explomtion itself exposes the requirements
which dominate the system's design, performance, and cost. One approach to identification of critical requirements is as follows:
1. wok at the princil!al perjon:zance requirements. In most cases, the principal
perfo~ce requrre?Ient WIll be one of the key critical requirements. Thus,
for FtreSat, the requrrements on how well it must detect and monitor forest
fires would normally be principal drivers of the system design.
2. Examine Table 3-1. The next step is to look at the requirements list in
Table 3-1 and determine which of these entries drive the system design, perfonnance, or cost.
3. wok l!t top-level requirements. Examine each of the top-level requirements
estabhsh~ when we defined the mission objectives (Sec. 1.3) and determine
how we WIll meet them. For each, ask whether or not meeting that requirement fundamentally limits the system's design, cost, or performance.
4. Look/or hidden requirements•. In some cases, hidden requirements such as
the need to use particular technologies or systems may dominate the mission
design, and cost.
•

Cri~cal requireme~ts sh~ul.d be distinguished from system drivers (as discussed ~ Sec. 2.3),
which are the ~~g III!SSIO~ p~te~ most strongly affecting perfoI1l1lll1Ce, cost, and risk.
The go~ of mISSIOn engmeenng IS to adjUst both the critical requirements (e.g., coverage and
reso~u~on) and the sy~m drivers (e.g., altitude and aperture) to satisfy the mission objectives
at mImmwn cost and nsk.

Mission Analysis

3.2

49

TABLE 3-1. Most Common Critical Requirements. See text for discussion.

Requirement

What It Affects

Where
Discussed

Coverage or
Response Time

Number of satelJltes, altitude, incDnation, communications Sees. 7.2, 13.2
architecture, payload field of view, scheduling, staffing
requirements

Resolution

Instrument size, altitude, attitude control

Sensitivity

Sec. 9.3
Payload size, complexity; processing, and thermal control; Sees. 9.5, 13.5

Mapping
Accuracy

Attitude control, orbit and attitude knowledge, mechanical Sec. 5.4
alignments, payload precision, processing

altitude

Transmit Power

Payload size and power, altitude

Sees. 11.2, 13.5

On-orbit Ufetime

Redundancy, weight, power and propulsion budgets,
component selection

Sees. 6.2.3,
8.1.3,10.4,19.2

Survivability

Altitude, weight, power, component selection, design of Sec. 8.2
space and ground system, number of satellites, number of
ground stations, communications architecture

For most FtreSat approaches, resolution and covemge are the principal critical
requirements, and we could find them by any of the first three options listed above.
The critical requirements depend on a specific mission concept. For the low-cost
FrreSat of Chap. 22, they are covemge and sensitivity. Resolution no longer concerns
us because the sensing is being done by ground instruments whose positions are
known well enough for accumte location.

3.2 Mission Analysis
Mission analysis is the process of quantifying the system parameters and the resulting performance. A particularly important subset of mission analysis is mission utility
analysis, described in Sec. 3.3, which is the process of quantifying how well the system meets its overall mission objectives. Recall that the mission objectives themselves
are not quantitative. However, our capacity to meet them should be quantified as well
as possible in order to allow us to make intelligent decisions about whether and how
to proceed. Mission requirements, introduced in Chap. 1 and discussed in more detail
in Chap. 4, are the numerical expressions of how well the objectives must be mel They
represent a balance between what we want and what is feasible within the constraints
on the system and, therefore, should be a central part of the mission analysis activity.
In pmctice, mission analysis is often concerned with how and how well previously
defined mission requirements can be mel In principle, mission analysis should be the
process by which we define and refine mission requirements in order to meet our broad
objectives at minimum cost and risk.
A key component of mission analysis is documentation, which provides the organizational memory of both the results and reasons. It is critical to understand fully the
choices made, even those which are neither technical nor optimal. We may choose to
apply a particular technology for political or economic reasons, or may not have
enough manpower to investigate alternatives. In any case, for successful analysis, we
must document the reaJ. reasons so others can reevaluate them later when the situation
may be differenl Technical people often shy away from nontechnical reasons or try to

50

Mission Evaluation

3.2

justify decisions by exaggerating their technical content For example, we may choose
for our preliminary FrreSat analysis a circular orbit at 1,000 Ian at an inclination of
60 deg because this is a good mid-range starting point. If so, we should document this
as the reason rather than trying to further justify these parameters. Later, we or others
can choose the best altitude and inclination rather than having to live by choices for
which there is no documented justification.
3.2.1 The Mission Analysis merarchy

I like to think of the mission analysis process as a huge electronic spreadsheet
model of a space system. On the left side of the spreadsheet matrix are the various
parameters and alternatives that one might assess, such as power, orbit, number of satellites, and manning levels for ground stations. Along the bottom row are the system's
quantitative outputs, indicating its performance, effectiveness, cost, and risk. The
matrix itself would capture the functional relationships among the many variables. We.
would like to wiggle any particular parameter, such as the diameter of the objective in
a detector lens or the number of people assigned to the ground station, and determine
the effect on all other parameters. In this way, we could quantify the system's performance as a function of all possible variables and their combinations.
Fortunately for the continuing employment of mission analysts, the above spreadsheet model does not yet exist· Instead, we analyze as many reasonable alternatives
as possible so we may understand how the system behaveS as a function of the principal design features-that is, the system drivers. This approach does not imply that we
are uninterested in secondary detail, but simply recognizes that the mission analysis
process, much like the space system we are attempting to analyze, is ultimately limited
in both cost and schedule. We must achieve the maximum level of understanding within these limits.
If the resources available for concept exploration are limited, as is nearly always
the case in realistic situations, then one of the most critical tasks is to intelligently limit
the scope of individual analyses. We must be able to compute approximate values for
many parameters and to determine at what level of detail we should reasonably stop.
In practice, this is made difficult by the continuing demand for additional detail and
depth. Thus, we must be able to determine and make clear to others what elements of
that detail will significantly affect the overall system performance and what elements
while important, can reasonably be left to a more detailed design phase.
'
We use two main methods to limit the depth of analysis in any particular area. The
first is to clearly identify each area's system drivers by the methods in Sec. 2.3 and to
concentrate most of the mission analysis effort on these drivers. The second is to
clearly identify the goal of the system study and to provide a level of detail appropriate
to that goal. This approach leads to a mission analysis hierarchy, summarized in
Table 3-2, in which studies take on increased levels of detail and complexity as the
activity progresses. The first three types of studies are meant to be quick with limited
detail and are not intended to provide definitive results. The last three are much more
complex ways to select an alternative to provide the best system performance.
• The Design-to-Cost model at JPL [Shishko, 1996] and similar models being developed
throughout the aerospace community are attempting to automate this basic design process of
evaluating the system-wide implication of changes. In due course, system engineers may
become technologically obsolete. Much like modern chess players, the challenge to future
syste~ engineers will be to stay ahead of the computer in being creative and innovative.

!

3.2

51

Mission Analysis

TABLE 3-2. The Mission Analysis Hierarchy. These help us decide how much detail to study
during the preliminary design phase.
Analysis
'JYpe

Goal

FeaslbDity
Assessment

To establish whether an objective is achievable and
its approximate degree of complexity

Sizing

To estimate basic parameters such as size, weight,
power or.cost

Estimate

Point Design To demonstrate feaslbDity and establish a basenne for
comparison of alternatives
Trade Study

}~

limited
detaD

To establish the relative advantages of alternative
approaches or options

Performance To quantify performance parameters
Assessment (e.g., resolution, tlmeRness) for a particular approach
UtDity
Assessment

'.

To quantify how well the system can meet overall
mission objectives

}-

detailed,
complex
trades

3.2.2 Studies with Limited Scope

The first three types of analyses in Table 3-2 provide methods for undertaking a
quick-look assessment They provide limited detail, but can frequently be done
quickly and at low cost Consequently, these quick-look assesments are important in
any situation which is funding-limited. We will outline these methods very briefly
here. However, nearly the entire book is devoted to the process of making initial
estimates, which is the basic goal of limited scope studies. We want to be able to
understand whether or not a particular project is feasible, and to get some idea of its
size, complexity, and cost. Doing this requires that we be able to make numerical
estimates and undertake limited studies in order to develop insight into the nature of
the problem we are trying to solve.
The biggest difficulty with limited scope studies is the tendency to believe that they
are more accurate than they really are. Thus it is not uncommon to use a feasibility
assessment or point design to establish the requirements for a mission in such detail
that in practice the point design becomes the only alternative which can meet them. As
long as we recognize the limited scope of these studies, they have a valuable place in
the mission analysis activity and represent one of the most important tools that we caD
use to understand the behavior of the system we are designing.
Feasibility Assessment. The simplest procedure in the mission analysis hierarchy
is the feasibility assessment, which we use to establish whether a particular objective
is achievable and to place broad bounds on its level of complexity. Frequently, we can
do a feasibility assessment simply by comparison with existing systems. Thus, we are
reasonably convinced that FireSat is feasible because most FrreSat tasks could be
performed by existing Earth resources satellites. Similarly, it is feasible to land a man
on the Moon and return him safely to Earth because we have done so in the past
We can also determine whether a particular goal is feasible by extrapolating our
past experience. Is it feasible to send people to Mars and bring them back safely? Here
we need to look at the principal differences between a Mars mission and a lunar

52

Mission Evaluation

3.2

mission. These differences include a longer flight time and higher gravity and,
therefore, higher lift-off velocity required to leave Mars. These factors make the job
more challenging and possibly more expensive than going to the Moon, but there is
nothing about the Mars mission which makes it inherently impossible. Getting to Mars
is feasible .. The problem is being able to do sO at modest cost and risk.
The third method of providing a feasibility assessment is to provide a very broad
design of how such a mission might be accomplished. For example, in the 1970s,
Gerard O'Neill of Princeton University proposed building large space colonies at the
Lagrange points between the Earth and the Moon [O'Neill, 1974]. No mission of this
scope had ever been undertaken, and it certainly was not a straightforward
extrapolation of any of our normal space experience. O'Neill and his colleagues
proceeded to establish the feasibility by developing a variety of alternative designs
for such space colonies [Richard D. Johnson and Charles Holbrow, 1977]. While the
work done was far in excess of a simple feasibility assessment, it clearly established that such colonies were feasible and gave at least an estimate of the scope of the
problem.
Sizing Estimate. The purpose of the sizing estimate is to provide an estimate of
basic mission parameters such as size, weight, power, or cost. We can do sizing estimates in much the same manner as the feasibility assessment: by analogy with existing
systems. Thus, if we are aware of an Earth observation system which has resolution
and information characteristics comparable to what we believe are needed for FrreSat,
we can use these parameters to give us an initial estimate of the FireSat parameters.
We can provide a quantitative estimate of key mission parameters by scaling the
parameters from existing missions or payloads in order to obtain estimates of the component sizes for our particular mission. This scaling process is described in Sec. 9.5
for space payloads, and in Sec. 10.5 for the spacecraft as a whole. The process of sizing
by scaling existing equipment is an extremely powerful approach to estimating what
it will take to achieve mission objectives. It is of use not only during the conceptual
design process, but throughout the hardware design definition and development
phases to evaluate the system design as it evolves. If scaling existing systems leads to
the suggestion that a particular component should be twice as heavy as the current
design suggests, this gives us reason to look very closely at the current design and to
try to determine whether or not any factors have been overlooked. We assume that
designers of previous systems did a reasonable job of optimizing their system. If the
current design is significantly different, either better or worse, then we would like to
understand the reasons for these differences. This is a good way to gain confidence in
the design process as we proceed.
As the design proceeds, more and more accurate sizing estimates come from the
scaling process. We proceed by breaking down the system into components and sizing
individual components based on scaling estimates with prior systems. Thus, we may
initially estimate the system as a whole divided into a spacecraft and ground station.
As the design becomes more detailed, we will break down the spacecraft into its relative components and estimate the size, weight, and power of each element based upon
scaling from prior systems or engineering estimates of the new system to be built. Similarly, we initially size the ground station by comparison with existing systems and
eventually by building a list of all the ground system components and undertaking
similar sizing estimates for each component. As introduced in Chap. I, this process of
creating a list of components and estimating parameters for each is known as budgeting and is described in more detail in Sec. 10.3.

3.2

Mission Analysis

53

Point Design. A point design is a design, possibly at a top level, for the entire
system which is capable of meeting the broad mission objectives. We refer to it as a
point design if we have not attempted to optimize the design to either maximize
performance or minimize weight, cost, or risk. The point design serves two basic
purposes. It demonstrates that the mission is feasible, and it can be used as a baseline
for comparison of alternatives. Thus, if we can establish a point design for FrreSat that
meets mission objectives with a spacecraft that weighs 500 kg and costs $50 million,
then we can use this as a comparison for later systems. If other systems cost more,
weigh more, and do not perform as well, then we will abandon those alternatives in
favor of the original baseline. If we continue to optimize the design so that the cost and
risk decrease, then we will let the baseline evolve to take into account the new design
approaches.
A point design is valuable because we can do it quickly and easily. There is no need
to optimize any of the parameters associated with the design unless it is necessary to
do so to meet mission objectives. This gives us a sense of whether it will be easy or
hard to meet the mission objectives and what are likely to be the most difficult aspects.
One of the biggest problems in a point design is taking it too seriously at a later stage.
We are always likely to regard work which we have done as representing the best
approach, even though we may not have been aware of alternatives. The key issue here
is to make use of point designs but at the same time to recognize their limitations and
to continue to do trades to reduce overall cost and risk and to look for alternative
approaches to meet mission objectives.

3.2.3 Trade Studies
Deciding whether to proceed with a mission should be based on a strawman system
concept or point design which shows that the mission objectives can be met within the
assigned constraints. Of course, the point design may not be the best solution, and we
would ordinarily consider a number of alternatives. The system trade process evaluates different broad concepts to establish their viability and impact on performance
and cost. We then combine the system trade results with the mission utility analysis
described in Sec. 3.3 to provide input for concept selection.
System trades consist of analyzing and selecting key parameters, called system
drivers, which determine mission performance. We use these parameters to define a
mission concept and mission architecture which can then be used for performance
analysis and utility analysis as described in Sec. 3.3. The key system trades are those
that define how the system works and determine its size, cost, and risk. Typically, the
key system trades will be in one of the following major areas:
• Critical requirements
• Mission concept
• Subject
• Type and complexity of payloads
• Orbit
Table 3-3 shows typical examples of areas in which there are key system trades for
representative missions. For essentially all missions, specification of the critical
requirements will be a key system trade. For the FireSat mission, the subject is

54

Mission Evaluation

3.2

probably the heat from the fire itself and the payload is probably an IR sensor. Thus,
the principal system trades are probably the mission concept, the resolution and
coverage requirements, and the orbit. For a mission such as the Space Telescope, the
orbit is of marginal importance and the subject is moderately well defined, if only very
poorly knOWD. Here the principal trades will be the resolution and pointing requirements, the payload, and the mission concept. Communications satellite systems are
normally in geosynchronous orbit with a well defined concept of operations. Here the
only real trade is with the required traffic load, the subject, and the size and complexity
of the payload.
Truly innovative approaches-those that really change how we think about a
problem-typically involve finding a new option among these key system trades.
Motorola's Iridium program and subsequent low-Earth orbit communications constellations represent a new way of thinking about using satellites for communications.
These have a very different concept of operations and different orbit from traditional
systems. Similarly, Chap. 22 presents an innovative approach to thinking about
FueSat that provides a totally different concept of operations and type of payload.
Innovative solutions are never easy to come by. To try to find them, a good place to
start is with the key system trade areas given in Table 3-3. .
TABLE 3-3. Representative Areas for Key System Trades. Although these system trades are
critical, we can't expect numerically precise answers to our system design problem.
Trade Area

Where
DIscussed

FlreSat

Telescope

Communications
Satellite
Yes

Space

Critical Requirements

Chap. 3

Yes

Yes

Miss/on Concept

Chap. 2

Yes

Yes

No

Subject

Chap. 9

No

No

Yes

Chaps. 9,13

No

Yes

Yes

Chap. 7

Yes

No

No

Payload Type and cOmplexity
Drbit

We cannot normally do system trades in a straightforward numerical fashion.
Choosing a different concept of operations, for example, will result in changes in most
or all of the mission parameters. Consequently, the fact that Option A requires twice
the power of Option B mayor may not be critical, depending on the orbit and number
of satellites for the two options. We need to look at the system as a whole to understand
which is better.
The best approach for key system trades is a utility analysis as described in Sec. 3.3.
We use the utility analysis to attempt to quantify our ability to meet mission objectives
as a function of cost. We then select the option which fulfills our objectives at the lowest cost and risk. As descn"bed in Sec. 3.4, this is still not a straightforward numerical
comparison, but does have quantitative components.
The simplest option for system trades is a list of the options and the reasons for
retaining or eliminating them. This allows us to consider the merits and demerits at a
high level without undertaking time-consuming trades. This, in turn, allows our list to
be challenged at a later date. We should go back to our key system trades on a regular
basis and determine whether our assumptions and conclusions are still valid. It is this
process of examination and review that allows us to use technical innovation and new
ideas. It is a process that must occur if we are to drive doWD the cost of space systems.

3.2

Mission Analysis

S5

The alternative to simply articulating trade options or conducting a complex mission utility analysis is a system trade in which we make a quantitative comparison of
multiple effects. This can be particularly effective in providing insight into the impact
of system drivers. For the purpose of trade studies, system drivers generally divide into
two categories-those for which more is better and those with multiple effects. By far
the easier to deal with are the "more is better" drivers, for they simply require us to
ask: "What is the cost of achieving more of the commodity in question?" For example,
in a space-based radar, added power improves performance but costs more money.
Thus, the designer will want to understand how much performance is available for
how much power. A second example is coverage. For virtually any Earth-oriented
system, including our FrreSat example, more coverage means better performance at
higher cost. Increasing coverage ordinarily means adding satellites or, perhaps,
increasing a single satellite's coverage by increasing its altitude or the range of its
sensors. Therefore, we often do a coverage trade considering performance vs. number
of satellites, substituting the latter for cost. Assessing performance as a function of
power or coverage may take considerable work, but it is relatively easy to present the
data for judging by the funding organizatiQn, the users, or other decision makers.
System drivers and critical requirements which cause multiple effects demand
more complex trade studies. Pushing parameters one way will improve some characteristics and degrade others. In trades of this type, we are looking for a solution which
provides the best mix of results. Examples of such trade studies include instrument
design, antenna type, and altitude. Each antenna style will have advantages and disadvantages, so we must trade various possible solutions depending upon the end goals
and relative importance of different effects.
In trades with multiple effects, selecting the correct independent parameter for each
trade is critical. Consider, for example, selecting either a reflector or a phased-army
antenna for a space-based radar [Brookner and Mahoney, 1986]. From the radar equation, we know that a principal performance parameter for a radar is the antenna
aperture. All other things being equal, larger antennas will provide much better performance. Thus, for our example, we might choose to compare reflector and phased-army
antennas of equal aperture. On this basis, we would choose the phased array because
its electronic steering makes it more agile than a reflector antenna, which must be
mechanically steered. But our choice becomes more complex when we recognize that
weight typically limits large space structures more than size does. Generally, we can
build a reflector larger than a phased array for a given weight. Based on weight, a
reflector may have considerably more power efficiency and, therefore, be a better
radar than a phased-array system. Thus, we would have to trade the better performance
ofa larger reflector vs. the better agility of a smaller phased array. Depending upon
the application, the results may be the same as for an aperture-based trade or reverse.
The important point is the critical nature of selecting the proper independent variable
in system trades. To do so, we must find the quantities which inherently limit the
system being considered. These could be weight, power, level of technology, cost, or
manufacturability, depending on the technology and circumstances.
Table 3-4 summarizes the system trade process for parameters with multiple
effects. Typically the trade parameter is one of our system drivers. We begin by identifying what performance areas or requirements affect or are affected by the trade
parameter. For example, the altitude of the spacecraft will have a key effect on COVel'age, resolution, and survivability and will be limited by launchability, payload weight,
communications, and radiation. We next assess the effect in each of these areas and

Mission Evaluation

3.2

document and summarize the results, generally without trying to create a numerical
average of different areas. Figure 3-1 shows this step for FrreSat We use the summary
to select the parameter value and a possible range. Although the process is complex
and may not have a well defined answer, it is not necessarily iterative unless we find
that the results require fundamental changes in other system parameters.
TABLE 3-4. System Trade Process for Parameters with Multiple Effects. The example is the
altitude trade for the AreSat mission. See also Ag. 3-1'.

RreSat
Exampl~

Step

Where
Discussed

1. Select trade parameter
(typically a system driver)

Altitude

Sec. 2.3

2. Identify factors which
affect the parameter or
are affected by it

Coverage
Deployment strategy (coverage evolution)
Orbit period
Tlmelnvlew
Eclipse fraction
Response time
Number of spacecraft needed
Launch capabifrty
Resolution
Payload weight
Radiation environment
Survivability
Jamming susceptrbility
Communications
lifetime

Sec. 7.2
Sec. 7.6
Sees. 6.1, 7.2
Sec. 7.2
Sec. 5.1
Sec. 7.2
Sees. 7.2, 7.6
Sec. 16.2
Sec. 9.3
Sec. 9.5
Sec. 6.1
Sec. 6.2
Sees. 6.2, 13.5
Sees. 13.1, 13.2
Sees. 6.2.3, 6.1.5

3. Assess Impact of
each factor

Can launch up to 1,800 km
Best coverage above 400 km
Resolutlon---lower is better
Survivability not an issue

4. Document and
summarize results

Launch
Coverage
Resolution
Survivability

Ag.3-1

5. Select parameter value
and possible range

Altitude = 700 km
600 to BOO km

discussed in text

3.2

Mission Aualysis

57

The FireSat altitude trade provides an example of trading on parameters with
multiple effects. For FrreSat, neither survivability nor communications is a key issue,
but coverage does push the satellite upward. On the other hand, payload weight and
good resolution tend to push the satellite lower. Figure 3-1 shows the results of a
hypothetical FueSat altitude trade. Notice that each parameter has various possible
outcomes. Altitudes above or below a certain value may be eliminated, or we may
simply prefer a general direction, such as lower altitude providing better resolution.
Based on these results, we select a nominal altitude of 700 km for FrreSat and a
possible range of 600 to 800 km. This selection is not magic. We have tried to balance
the alternatives sensibly, but not in a way that we can numerically justify.

CharactBTlstlc

••
•

Launch CapabDIty
Radiation
Coverage
Coverage Evolution
Payload Resolution
Communications

Mowed Range (Ian)

Inner Radiation Bell

Ufetime

I

0

Rg. 3-1.

Comnumfs

Launch Vehicle UmIt

I

1,000

I

2,000

••
••

I

Higher Is Better
Major Plateau at 375 kin
Lower Is Better
Higher Is Better
Trade with Launch Umil

I

3,000

Results of RreSat Altitude Trade. See Table 3-4 and Table 7-6 in Sec. 7.4 for a Dst
of trade Issues. Pofltlcal constraints and survivabirrty were not of concern for the
RreSat altitude trade.

3.2.4 Performance Assessments

Quantifying performance demands an appropriate level of detail. Too much detail
drains resources away from other issues; too little keeps us from determining the

Altitude trades are perhaps the most common example of a trade in which multiple
influences push the parameter in different ways. We would normally like to move the
satellite higher to achieve better coverage, better survivability, and easier communications. On the other hand.launchability, resolution, and payload weight tend to drive
the satellite lower. The radiation environment dictates specific altitudes we would like
to avoid, and the eclipse fraction mayor may not play a crucial role in the altitude
trade. We must aSsess each of these effects and summarize all of them to complete a
trade study. One possible summary is a numerically weighted average of the various
outcomes, such as three times the coverage in square nautical miles per second divided
by twice the resolution in furlongs. Although this provides a convenient numerical
answer, it does not provide the physical insight or conceptual balance needed for
intelligent choices. A better solution is to provide the data on all of the relevant parameters and choose based on inspection rather than numerical weighting.

important issues or causes us to assess the actual performance incorrectly.
To compute system performance, we use three main techniques:
• System algorithms
• Analogy with existing systems
• Simulation
System algorithms are the basic physical or geometric formulas associated with a
particular system or process, such as those for determining resolution in diffractionlimited optics, finding the beam size of an antenna, analyzing a link budget, or
assessing geometric coverage. Table 3-5 lists system algorithms typically used ~or
space mission analysis. System algorithms provide the best method for computing
performance. They provide clear traceability and establish the relationship between
design parameters and performance characteristics. Thus, for FueSat, we are interested in the resolution of an on-orbit rue detector. Using the formula for diffractionlimited optics in Chap. 9, we can compute the achievable angular resolution from the
instrument objective's diameter. We can then apply the geometric formulas in Chap. 5
to tranSlate this angular resolution to resolution on the ground. This result gives us a

3.2

Mission Evaluation

58

direct relationship between the altitude of the FrreSat spacecraft, the size of the
payload. the angles at which it works, and the resolution with which it can distinguish
features on the ground.
TABLE 3-5. Common System Algorithms Used for Quantifying Basic Levels of Performance. These analyses use physical or geometrical formulas to determine how
system performance varies with key parameters.
Algorithm

Used For

UnkBudget

Communications and data rate analysis

Diffraction-limited
Optics

Aperture sizing for optics or antennas;
determining resolution

Payload Sensitivity

Payload sizing and performance estImetes

3.3

Step 8: Mission Utility

key performance parameters. However, simulations allow much more complex modeling and can incorporate limits on performance from multiple factors (e.g., resolution,
stability, and data rate). Because they provide much less insight, however, we must
review the results carefully to see if they apply to given situations. Still, in complex
circumstances, simulation may be the only acceptable way to quantify system performance. A much less expensive method of.simulation is the use of commercial mission
analysis tools as discussed in Sec. 3.3.3.

Where
Discussed

Sec. 13.3.6
Sec. 9.3

Sees. 9.4, 9.5

Radar Equation

Radar sizing and performance estimates

[Cantaflo,1989)

Earth Coverage,
Area Search Rates

Coverage assessment; system sizing;
performance estImetes

Sees. 5.2, 7.2

Mapping and
Pointing Budget

Geolocation; Instrument and antenna pointing;
lmege sensing

Sec. 5.4

System algorithms are powerful in that they show us directly how performance
varies with key parameters. However, they are inherently limited because they presume the rest of the system is designed with fundamental physics or geometry as the
limiting characteristic. For FueSat, resolution could also be limited by the optical
quality of the lens, by the detector technology, by the spacecraft's pointing stability,
or even by the data rates at which the instrument can provide results or that the satellite
can transmit to the ground. In using system algorithms, we assume that we have
correctly identified what limits system performance. But we must understand that
these assumptions may break down as each parameter changes. Fmding the limits of
these system algorithms helps us analyze the problem and determine its key components. Thus, we may find that a low-cost FrreSat system is limited principally by
achieving spacecraft stability at low cost. Therefore, our attention would be focused
on the attitude control system and on the level of resolution that can be achieved as a
function of system cost
The second method for quantifying performance is by comparing our design with
existing systems. In this type of analysis we use the established characteristics of
existing sensors, systems, or components and adjust the expected performance according to basic physics or the continuing evolution of technology. The list of payload
instruments in Chap. 9 is an excellent starting point for comparing performance with
existing systems. We could. for example, use the field of view, resolution, and integration time for an existing sensor and apply them to FJreSat. We then modify the basic
sensor parameters such as the aperture, focal length, or pixel size, to satisfy our mission's unique requirements. To do this, we must work with someone who knows the
technology, the allowable range of modifications, and their cost For example, we may
be able to improve the resolution by doubling the diameter of the objective, but doing
so may cost too much. Thus, to estimate performance based on existing systems, we
need information from those who understand the main cost and performance drivers
of that technology.
'
The third way to quantify system performance is simulation, described in more
detail in Sec. 3.3.2. Because it is time-consuming, we typically use simulation only for

3.3 Step 8: Mission Utility
Mission utility tuUllysis quantifies mission performance as a function of design,
cost, risk, and schedule. It is used to (1) provide quantitative information for decision
making, and (2) provide feedback on the system design. Ultimately, an individual or
group will decide whether to build a space system and which system to build based on
overall performance, cost, and risk relative to other activities. As discussed in Sec. 3.4,
this does not mean the decisiori is or should be fundamentally technical in nature.
However, even though basic decisions may be political, economic, or sociological, the
best possible quantitative information from the mission utility analysis process should
be available to support them.
Mission utility analysis also provides feedback for the system design by assessing
how well altemative configurations meet the mission objectives. FJreSat shows how
this process might work in practice. Mission analysis quantifies how well alternative
systems can detect and monitor forest fires, thereby helping us to decide whether to
proceed with a more detailed design of several satellites in low-Earth orbit or a single
larger satellite in a higher orbit As we continue these trades, mission analysis
establishes the probability of being able to detect a given forest fire within a given
time, with and without FrreSat, and with varying numbers of spacecraft. For FireSat,
the decision makers are those responsible for protecting the forests of the United
States. We want to provide them with the technical information they need to determine
whether they should spend their limited resources on FrreSat or on some alternative.
If they select FrreSat, we will provide the technical information needed to allow them
to select how many satellites and what level of redundancy to include.

3.3.1 Performance Parameters and Measures of Etfectiveness
The purpose of mission analysis is to quantify the system's performance and its
ability to meet the ultimate mission objectives. Typically this requires two distinct
types of quantities-performance parameters and measures of effectiveness. Performonee parameters, such as those shown in Table 3-6 for FrreSat, quantify how well
the system works, without explicitly measuring how well it meets mission objectives.
. Performance parameters may include coverage statistics, power efficiency, or the
resolution of a particular instrument as a function of nadir angle. In contrast, measures
of effectiveness (MoBs) or figures of merit (FoMs) quantify directly how well the
system meets the mission objectives. For FrreSat, the principal MoE will be a numerical estimate of how well the system can detect forest fJreS or the consequences of
doiJig so. This could. for example, be the probability of detecting a given forest fire
within 6 hours, or the estimated dollar value of savings resulting from early fire detection. Table 3-7 shows other examples.

60

Mission Evaluation

3.3

TABLE 3-6. Representative Performance Parameters for RreSat By using various performance parameters, we get a better overall picture of our FireSat design.
Performance Parameter
Instantaneous maximum area coverage rate

How DetermIned
Analysis

Orbit average area coverage rate
(takes into account forest coverage, duty cycle)
Mean time between observations

Simulation
Analysis

Ground position knowledge

Analysis'

System response time (See Sec. 72.3 for definition)

Simulation

TABLE 3-7. Representative Measures of Effectiveness (MoEs) for FireSat. These Measures
of Effectiveness help us determine how well various designs meet our mission
objectives.
Goal

MoE

Detection

Probability of detection vs. time
(milestones at 4, 8, 24 hours)

Prompt Knowledge

TIme late = time from observation
to availability at monitoring office

Monitoring

Probability of containment

Save Property
and Reduce Cost

Value of property saved plus savings in
firefighting costs

How Estimated
Simulation
Analysis
Simulation
Simulation +
Analysis

We can usually determine perfonnance parameters unambiguously. For example,
either by analysis or simulation we can assess the level of covemge for any point on
the Earth's surface. A probability of detecting and containing forest fires better
measures our end objective, but is also much more difficult to quantify. It may depend
on how we construct scenarios and simulations, what we assume about ground
resources, and how we use the FrreSat data to fight fires.
Good measures of effectiveness are critical to successful mission analysis and
design. Ifwe cannot quantify the degree to which we have met the mission objectives,
there is little hope that we can meet them in a cost-effective fashion. The rest of this
section defines and chamcterizes good measures of effectiveness, and Sees. 3.3.2 and
3.3.3 show how we evaluate them.
Good measures of effectiveness must be
• Clearly related to mission objectives
• Understandable by decision makers
• Quantifiable
• Sensitive to system design (if used as a design selection criterion)
MoBs are useless if decision makers cannot understand them. "Accelemtion in the
marginal rate of forest-fire detection within the latitudinal covemge regime of the endof-life satellite constellation" will'likely need substantial explanation to be effective.
On the other hand, clear MoBs which are insensitive to the details of the system design,
such as the largest covemge gap over one year, cannot distinguish the quality of one
. system from another. Ordinarily, no single measure of effectiveness can be used to
quantify how the overall system meets mission objectives. Thus, we prefer to provide

3.3

Step 8: MIssion Utility

61

a few measures of effectiveness summarizing the system's capacity to achieve its
broad objectives.
Measures of effectiveness generally fall into one of three broad categories associated with (1) discrete events, (2) covemge of a continuous activity, or (3) timeliness of
the information or other indicators of quality. Discrete events include forest fires,
nuclear explosions, ships crossing a barrier, or cosmic my events. In this case, the best
measures of effectiveness are the rate that can be sustained (identify up to 20 forest
fires per hour), or the probability of successful identification (90% probability that a
forest fire will be detected within 6 hours after ignition). The probability of detecting
discrete events is the most common measure of effectiveness. It is useful both in providing good insight to the user community and in allowing the user to create additional
measures of effectiveness, such as the probability of extinguishing a forest fire in a
given time.
Some mission objectives are not directly quantifiable in probabilistic terms. For
example, we may want continuous covemge of a particular event or activity, such as
continuous surveillance of the cmb nebula for extmneous X-ray bursts or continuous
monitoring of Yosemite for tempemure variations. Here the typical measure of effectiveness is some type of covemge or gap statistics such as the mean observation gap or
maximum gap under a particular condition. Unfortunately, Gaussian (normal probability) statistics do not ordinarily apply to satellite covemge; therefore, the usual
measure of avemge values can be very misleading. Additional details and a way to
resolve this problem are part of the discussion of covemge measures of effectiveness
in Sec. 7.2.
A third type of measure of effectiveness assesses the quality of a result mther than
whether or when it occurs. It may include, for example, the system's ability to resolve
the tempemture of forest fires. Another common measure of quality is the timelineSs
of the data, usually expressed as time late, or, in more positive terms for the user, as
the time margin from when the data arrives until it is needed. Timeliness MoBs might
include the avemge time from ignition of the forest fire to its initial detection or,
viewed from the perspective of a potential application, the avemge warning time
before a fire strikes a population' center. This type of information, illustmted in
Fig. 3-2, allows the decision maker to assess the value of FneSat in meeting community needs.
3.3.2 Mission Utility Simulation

In analyzing mission utility, we try to evaluate the measures of effectiveness
numerically as a function of cost and risk, but this is hard to do. Instead, we typically
use principal system pammeters, such as the number of satellites, total on-orbit weight,
or payload size, as stand-ins for cost. Thus, we might calculate measures of effectiveness as a function of constellation size, assuming that more satellites cost more money.
If we can establish numerical values for meaningful measures of effectiveness as a
function of the system drivers and understand the underlying reasons for the results,
we will have taken a major step toward quantifying the space mission analysis and
design process.
Recall that mission utility analysis has two distinct but equally important goa1s---to
aid design and provide information for decision making. It helps us design the mission
by examining the relative benefits of alternatives. For key parameters such as payload
type or ovemll system power, we can show how utility depends on design choices, and
therefore, intelligently select among design options.

62

Mission Evaluation

State
of Alert

3.3

Preparations
BegIn

FIre
Hits

I
I
I
I
I

O---t
-72

Measure of Effectiveness
Fig. 3-2.

-48

-24

= Warning TIme (hours)

Forast Fire Warning TlmB for Inhabited Areas. A hypothetical measure of effectiveness for FlreSat

Mission utility analysis also provides information that is readily usable to decision
makers. Generally those who determine funding levels or whether to build a particular
space system do not have either the time or inclination to assess detailed technical
studies. For large space programs, decisions ultimately depend on a relatively small
amount of information being assessed by individuals at a high level in industry or
government A strong utility analysis allows these high-level judgments to be more
informed and more nearly based on sound technical assessments. By providing summary performance data in a form the decision-making audience can understand, the
mission utility analysis can make a major contribution to the technical decisionmaking process.
Typically, the only effective way to evaluate mission utility is to use a mission
utility simulation designed specifically for this purpose. (Commercial simulators are
discussed in Sec. 3.3.3.) This is not the same as a payload simulator, which evaluates
performance parameters for various payloads. For FrreSat, a payload simulator might
compute the level of observable temperature changes or the number of acres that can
be searched per orbit pass. In contrast, the mission simulator assumes a level of
performance for the payload and assesses its ability to meet mission objectives. The
FrreSat mission simulator would determine how soon forest fires can be detected or
the amount of acreage that can be saved per year.
In principle, mission simulators are straightforward. In practice, they are expensive
and time consuming to create and are rarely as successful as we would like. Attempts
to achieve excessive fidelity tend to dramatically increase the cost and reduce the
effectiveness of most mission simulators. The goal of mission simulation is to estimate
measures of effectiveness as a function of key system parameters. We must restrict the
simulator as much as possible to achieving this goal. Overly detailed simulations
require more time and money to create and are much less useful, because computer
time and other costs keep us from running them enough for effective trade studies. The

Step 8: Mission Utility

3.3

63

simulator must be simple enough to allow making multiple runs, so we can collect
statistical data and explore various scenarios and design options.
The mission simulation should include parameters that directly affect utility, such
as the orbit geometry, motion or changes in the targets or background, system scheduling, and other key issues, as shown in Fig. 3-3. The problem of excessive detail is
best solved by providing numerical models obtained from more detailed simulations
of the payload or other system components. For example, we may compute FrreSat's
capacity to detect a forest fire by modeling the detector. ~si~vity, atmospheric characteristics, range to the fire, and the background conditions m the observed area. A
detailed payload simulation should include these parameters. After running the payload simulator many times, we can, for example, tabulate the probability of detecting
a fire based on observation geometry and time of day. The mission simulator uses this
table to assess various scenarios and scheduling algorithms. Thus, the mission simulator might compute the mission geometry and time of day and use the lookuIJ. table to
determine the payload effectiveness. With this method, we can dramatically reduce
repetitive computations in each mi~sion simulatm: run,. do ~ore simul~ti~ns, ~
explore more mission options than WIth a.more detailed sunulation. The JlllSSlon SllDulator should be a collection of the results of more detailed simulations along with
unique mission parameters such as the relative geometry between the satellites a
constellation, variations in ground targets or background, and the system scheduling
or downlink communications. Creating sub-models also makes it easier to generate
utility simulations. We start with simple models for the individual components and
develop more realistic tables as we create and run more detailed payload or component
simulations.

i?

Main Models

/ .

Simulator &
Output Processors

____________~
L.

Energy

~

Time uIiIlzaIlon

=.:;ormanca ~_

Energy used
Pointing sIatIstIcs
Time used

Data utiliza~n

Gap statistics

Background characteristics

/

PrIncipal Outpula
Arn~~n~
Observation data
System parameteJs

Probability of

Observation Types
(FIreSat example)
Search mode
Map mode
Are boundary mode
Temperature sensing

Fig. 3-3.

detecllonlconlalnment
PrIncipal Inputs
ScenarIos
Tasking
System parameters
ConsteDalion parameters

Response times
ScheduDng sIatIstIcs

Cloud cover
Are detection MoEs

Results of FlreSat AltItude Trade. See Table 3-4 and Table 7-6 In Sec. 7.4 for a list
of trade Issues. Political constraints and survivabDity were not of concem for the
FlreSat altitude trade.

Table 3-8 shows the typical sequence for simulating mission utility, including a
distinct division into data generation and output This division allows us to do various
statistical analyses on a single data set or combine the outputs from many runi; in different ways. In a conStellation of satellites, scheduling is often a key issue in mission
utility. The constellation's utility depends largely on the system's capacity to schedule

64

Mission Evaluation

3.3

resource use appropriately among the satellites. At the end of a single simulation run,
the system should collect and compute the statistics for that scenario, generate appro.
priate output plots or data, and compute individual measures of effectiveness, such as
the percent of forest fires detected in that particular run.
TABLE 3-8. Typical Sequence Flow of a TIme-Stepped Mission UtIlity Simulation. Follow.
ing this sequence for many runs, we can create statistical measures of effectiveness that help us evaluate our design.

Phase 1- Data Generation
Advance time step
Compute changes In terget or background characteristics
Update satenite positions
Update viewing geometry parameters
Schedule observations or operations
Compute pointing changes
Compute and seve performance statistics
Update setenite consumables
Save data for this time step
Go to next time step
Phase" - Output Generation and Statistics Collection
Compute scenario statistics
Compute measures of effectiveness tor the Individual run
Prepare output plots and data tor the individual run
Phase ID - Monte Carlo Runs
Set new scenario start time
Repeat Phase I and II
Collect multi-run statistics
Compute statistical measures of effectiveness
Prepare Monie Cario output plots and data

The next step is to run more simulations using new start times or otherwise varying
the conditions for the scenarios. Changing the start times alters the relative timing and
geometry between the satellites and the events they are observing, thus, averaging
results caused by these characteristics. Collecting statistics on multiple runs is called
a Monte Carlo simulation. For example, we might average the percentage of forest
fires detected over different runs with different timing, but on the same scenario, to
estimate the overall probability of detecting forest fires-our ultimate measure of
effectiveness. The system simulator should accumulate output statistics and prepare
output plots over the Monte Carlo runs.
Frequently, in running mission simulations, we must choose between realistic and
analytical scenarios. Realistic scenarios usually are too complex to help us understand
how the system works but are still necessary to satisfy the end users. On the other hand,
simple scenarios illuminate how the system is working but do not show how it will
wor~ ~ a real ~ituation. The ~ answer is to use simple scenarios for analysis and
realistic scenanos to assess lDlSSlon performance. In the FrreSat example, we might
begin by studying a single satellite to determine how it behaves and then expand to a
more complex simulation with several satellites. We might also start evaluating a

3.3

Step 8: Mission Utility

65

multi-satellite constellation by looking at its response to a simple situation, such as one
fire or a small group of uniformly distributed fires. This trial run will suggest how the
system performs and how changes affect it. We can then apply this understanding as
we develop more realistic simulations.
A related problem concerns using a baseline scenario to compare options and
designs. Repeating a single scenario allows us to understand the scenario and the
system's response to it. We can also establish quantitative differences by showing how
different designs respond to the same scenario. But this approach tends to mask characteristics that might arise solely from a particular scenario. Thus, we must understand
what happens as the baseline changes and watch for chance results developing from
our choice of a particular baseline scenario.
Finally, mission simulations must generate usable and understandable information
for decision makers--imormation that provides physical insight. Two examples are
strip charts of various system characteristics and animated output. A strip chart plot is
similar to the output of a seismograph or any multi-pin plotter, in which various characteristics are plotted as a function of time. These characteristics might include, for
example, whether a particular satellite is in eclipse, how much time it spends in active
observation, and the spacecraft attitude during a particular time step. Plots of this type
give a good feel for the flow of events as the simulation proceeds.
A valuable alternative for understanding the flow of events is looking at an animation of the output, such as a picture of the Earth showing various changes in the target,
background, and observation geometry as the satellites fly overhead. Thus, as Fig. 3-4
illustrates, an animated simulation of FireSat output could be a map of a fire-sensitive
region with areas changing color as fires begin, lines showing satellite coverage, and
indications as to when fires are first detected or when mapping of fires occurs.
Animation is not as numerical as statistical data, but it shows more clearly how the
satellite system is working and how well it will meet broad objectives. Thus, mission
analysts and end users can assess the system's performance, strengths and shortcomings, and the changes needed to make it work better.
3.3.3 Commercial Mission Analysis and Mission Utility Tools

. Creating a mission utility simulation for your specific mission or mission concept
is both time consuming and expensive. It is not uncommon for the simulation to be
completed at nearly the same time as the end of the study, such that there is relatively
little time to use the simulation to effectively explore the multitude of options available
to the innovative system designer.
In my view, the single largest step in reducing software cost and risk is the use of
commercial, off-the-shelf (COTS) software. The basic role of COTS software in space
is to spread the development cost over multiple programs and reduce the risk by using
software that has been tested and used many times before. Because the number of
purchasers of space software is extremely small, the savings will be nowhere near as
large as for commercial word processors. Nonetheless, reductions in cost, schedule,
and risk can be substantial. Most COTS software should be at least 5 times cheaper
than program-unique software and is typically 10 or more times less expensive. In
addition, COTS software will ordinarily have much better documentation and user
interfaces and will be more flexible and robust, able to support various missions and
circumstances.
The use of COTS software is growing, but most large companies and government
agencies still develop their own space-related software for several reasons. One of the

I'

66

Mission Evaluation

3.3

3.3

Step 8: Mission Utility

67

industry. Because the number of copies sold is smaII, most space software companies
are cottage industries with a small staff and limited resources. We shouldn't expect
space-software developers to change their products at no cost to meet unique needs.
For example, it would be unrealistic to expect a vendor of commercial software for
low-Earth orbit spacecraft to modify the software for interplanetary missions at no
cost, because few groups will buy interplanetary software. On the other hand, the smaII
size of the industry means developers are eager to satisfy the customers' needs, so
most are williilg to work with their customer and to accept contracts to modify their
products for specific applications. This can be far less expensive than developing software completely from scratch.
There is a hierarchy of software cost, going from using COTS software as is, to
developing an entirely new system. In order of increasing cost, the main options are
1. Use COTS software as sold

2. Use COTS software libraries
3. Modify COTS software to meet specific program needs (modification may be
done by mission developer, prime contractor, or software developer)
Rg. 3-4.

HypotheUcaJ AnlmaUon Output for RreSat MIssIon UUJIty Slmulator. Color displays are very valuable for animation sequences because we need to convey multiple
parameters in each frame.

best ways to develop and maintain expertise is to create your own systems and models.
Thus, organizations may want to support their own software group, particularly when
money is tight. Also, it's hard to overcome the perception that it costs less to incrementally upgrade one's own system than to bear the cost and uncertainty of new COTS
tools. In this trade, the "home built" systems often don't include maintenance costs.
Fmally, customers often don't know which COTS tools are available. Professional
aerospace software doesn't appear in normal software outlets, advertising budgets are
smaIl, and most information is word-of-mouth through people already in the community. Despite these substantial obstacles, many organizations are now using COTS
software in response to the strong demand to reduce cost.
In order to use COTS tools to reduce space system cost, we need to change the way
we use software. We need to adapt to software not being exactly what we want, look
for ways to make existing software satisfy the need, or modify COTS software to more
closely match requirements. This is a normal part of doing business in other fields:
Very few firms choose to write their own word processor, even though no single word
processor precisely meets all needs. Instead, they choose one that most closely
matches what they want in terms of functions, support, and ease of use. We should use
the same criteria for COTS space software. In addition, we need to set realistic
expectations concerning what COTS software can do. Clearly, we can't expect the low
prices and extensive support that buyers of globally marketed commercial software
enjoy. We have to adjust our expectations to the smaller market for space-related software, which means costs will be much higher than for normal commercial products.
Maintenance and upgrades will ordinarily require an ongoing maintenance contract.
Within the aerospace community, a standard arrangement is for a maintenance and
upgrade contract to cost 15% of the purchase price per year.
Using COTS software and reusing existing noncommercial softWare requires a
different mindset than continuously redeveloping software. We need to understand
both the strengths and weaknesses of the relatively smaII space commercial software

4. Reuse existing flight or ground software systems or modules
5. Develop new systems based largely on existing software components
6. Develop new systems from scratch using formal requirements and development processes
This hierarchy contains several potential traps. It may seem that the most economical
approach would be for the prime contractor or end-user to modify COTS software to
meet their needs. However, it is likely that the COTS software developer is in a better
position to make modifications economically and quickly. Although the end-users are
more familiar with the objectives and the mission, the software developer is more
familiar with the organization and structure of the existing code.
Secondly, there is frequently a strong desire to reuse existing code. This will likely
be cheaper if the code was developed to be maintainable and the developers are still
avaiIable. On the other hand, for project-unique code developed with no requirement
for maintainability, it may be cheaper, more efficient, and less risky simply to discard
the old software and begin again.
Commercial mission analysis tools fall into three broad categories, each of which
is described below. Representative examples of these tools are listed in Table 3-9.
Generic Aruzlysis Systems. These are programs, such as MatLab™, which are
intended to allow analysis and simulation of a wide variety of engineering and science
problems. They typically cost a few hundred to several thousand dollars and can
dramatically reduce the time needed to create simulations and analyze the results.
Because these are generic tools, specific simulation characteristics are set up by the
user, although subroutine libraries often exist. Thus, we will need to create orbit
propagators, attitude models, environment models, and whatever else the problem
dictates. We use this type of simulation principally for obtaining mathematical data
and typically not for animation.
Low-Cost Aruzlysis Programs. These are programs intended for a much wider
audience such as the amateur astronomy or space science community. However, when
carefuIly selected and used appropriately, they can provide nearly instant results at
very low cost The programs themselves cost a few hundred dollars or less, are

68

Mission Evaluation

3.3

TABLE 3-9. Commercial Space Mission Analysis and Design Software. New versions are
typically released roughly annually. Because of the very small size of the space
market, commercial space software both enters and leaves the marketplace on a
regular basis.
Approx.

Product

Publisher

Dance of
the Planets

Arc Science
Simulations

$250

Amateur visual and gravitational model of the solar
system useful for interplanetary mission design

Edge

Autometrlc

$5,000+

Professional mission analysis system; many
modules; can be customized

EWB

Maxwell
Labs

High

Professional tool for space mission trade studies;
used for Space Station

MUSE module Microcosm

$6,500

MIssion Utility/Systems engineering tool; evaluates
figures of merit; can be customized by user

ORB

AIM

<$100

Orbit analysis tool included with the book
Spacecraft Mission Desigrr; primarily Interplanetary

Orbit Works

ARSoftware

$700

Orbit analysis, pess geometry, related tools; used by
many ground operations groups

SMAD
Software

KBSciences

$500

10 software modules that Implement equations in
the SMAD book

Satellite Tool
Klt,STK

Analytical
Graphics

(*)

Professional mission analysis system; many
modules

Cost

Purpose

• Base program is free; modules range from $2.000 to $30,000.

3.4

Step 9: Mission Concept Selection

69

on modules for animation generation, orbit determination and propagation, coverage
analysis, and mission scheduling. The Mission Utility/Systems Engineering Module
(MUSE) by Microcosm allows the evalua~on of a variety of ~eneri~ figures of merit
(such as coverage or timeliness) and prOVIdes Monte Carlo sllDulation runs to create
statistical output. MUSE is intended specifically to allow the user to define new figures of merit to allow the rapid creation of mission-specific simulatiOns. The Edge
product family by Autometric provides very high-~delity animation of a variety of
space missions and is intended to be adapted by either ~e ~ompany or the user. to
become a mission-specific simulation. Each of the tools m this category can proVIde
high-fidelity simulations at a much lower cost than creating systems from scratch.

3.4 Step 9: Mission Concept Selection
This section is concerned not with the detailed engineering decisions for a space
mission, but with the broad trades involved in defining the overall mission-whether
to proceed with it and what concep! t~ use. Decisio~ for ~pace mi~si~ns fall into ~
broad categories: (1) go/no-go deC1S1on on proceeding With the lDlSSlon; (2) selection
of the mission concept; and (3) detailed engineering decisions, which are generally
described throughout this book.
.
In principle, the go/no-go decision depends on only a few factors, the most llDportant of which are:
• Does the proPosed system meet the overall mission objectives?
• Is it technically feasible?

immediately available from mail-order retailers, and can be run within a few hours of
receiving them. A typical program in this category is Dance ofthe Planets, developed
by Arc Science Simulations, for simulating astronomical events and allowing amateur
space enthusiasts to create simulations of solar system events and obtain views from
spacecraft which they define. A key characteristic of this program is that it creates
simulations by integrating the equations of motion of celestial objects, thus allowing
the user to define an interplanetary spacecraft orbit and determine its interaction with
various celestial bodies. While less accurate than high-fidelity simulations created
after a mission is fully funded, this type of tool can produce moderately accurate
results quickly and at very low cost
A second type of system used by amateurs consists of data sets, such as star
catalogs, and the associated programs used to access and manipulate the data. For
example, the complete Hubble Guide Star Catalog, created for the Space Telescope
mission and containing over 19 million stars and nonstellar objects, is available on two
CD-ROMs for less than $100. Smaller star catalogs contain fewer entries, but typically
have much more data about each of the stars. All of the electronic star catalogs can be
read .and star charts created by any of the major sky plotting programs, again available
off-the-shelf for a few hundred dollars.
Space Mission Analysis Systems. These are professional engineering tools created
specifically for the analysis and design of space missions. Prices are several thousand
dollars and up. These tools can create very realistic simulations, including data generation, animation, user-defined figures of merit, and Monte Carlo simulations. One of
the most widely used tools in this category is Satellite Tool Kit (STK), developed by
Analytical Graphics, which provides a basic simulation capability and a variety of add-

• Is the level of risk acceptable?

• Are the schedule and budget within the established constraints?
• Do preliminary results show this option to be better than nonspace solutions?
In addition to the above technical issues, a number of nontechnical criteria are ordinarily equally or more important in the decision-making process:

• Does the mission meet the political objectives?
• Are the organizational responsibilities acceptable to all of the organizations
involved in the decision?
• Does the mission support the infrastructure in place or contemplated?
For example, a mission may be approved to keep an organization in b~iness, or it
may be delayed or suspended if it requires creating an infrastructure perce1ved as .not
needed in the long term. The mission analysis activity must incl~e nontechnical
factors associated with space missions and see that they are appropnately addressed.
The top-level trades in concept selection are usually not fully qUantitative, and we
should not force them to be. The purpose of the trade studies and utility analysis is to
make the decisions as informed as possible. We wish to add quantitative information
to the decisions, not quantify the decision making. In other worru:, w~ sho~d ~ot
undervalue the decision-maker's judgment by attempting to replace It With a sunplistic formula or rule.
Table 3-10 shows how we might try to quantify a decision. Assume that a system
costs $500 million, but an improvement could save upto $300 million. To save this

70

Mission Evaluation

3.4

money, we could use option A, B, or C. Option A would cost $35 million, but the probability of success is only 70%; B would cost $100 million with 99% probability of
success; C would cost $200 million with a 99.9% probability of success.
TABLE 3-10.

$SooM

Potential Savings If Improvement Is Successful

$3OOM

Option

FueSat. The details of such plots will depend on the latitude under consideration,
swath coverage, altitude, and various other parameters. However, the characteristic of
increasing coverage with more satellites eventually reaches a point of diminishing
returns. This will normally be true irrespective of the coverage assumptions.

MathemaUcal Model of HYPCJtheUcaI DecisIon Process (costs In $M). Numer·
Ically, we would choose B or J!i If It were available. Realistically, any of the choices
may be best depending on the decision criteria

Current Cost

Cost of
Improvement

ProbabHIty
of Success

Total Cost
IfSuccessfuJ

Total Cost

Expected

IfFaHed

Total Cost

Expected
Savings

325

175

A

35

70%

235

535

B

100

99%

300

600

303

197

C

200

99.9O"k

400

700

400.3

99.7

{(

35

80%

235

535

295

205

Which option should we select? The table gives the cost if successfuI, the cost if the
improvement fails, and the expected values of both the cost and net savings. By
numbers alone, we would select option B with an expected savings .of $197 million.
However,'reasonable and valid cases can be made for both A and C. In option A, we
risk only $35 million, and, therefore, are minimizing the total cost if the improvement
succeeds or if it fails. In fact, the $600 million cost of failure for option B may be too
much for the system to bear, no matter the expected savings. Option C provides a net
savings of "only" $100 million, but its success is virtually certain. Although savings
for this option are less dramatic, it does provide major savings while minimizing risk.
In this case, we may assume the cost to be a fixed $400 million, with failure being so
unlikely that we can discount it. Option B, of course, balances cost and risk to maximize the expected savings.
Suppose, however, that option A had an 80% probability of success as shown in A',
rather than the original 70% probability. In this case, the expected savings of A' would
increase to $205 million, and would make it the preferred approach in pure expectation
terms. However, most individuals or groups faced with decisions of this sort are
unlikely to change from option B to A' based solely on the increase in estimated probability to 80%. Their decisions are more likely to depend on perceived risk or on
minimizing. losses. Using nonmathematical criteria does not make the decisions
incorrect or invalid, nor does it make the numerical values unimportant. We need
quantitative information to choose between options but we do not have to base our
decisions exclusively on this information.
As a second example, we can apply the results of utility analysis to concept selection for FtreSat. In particular, the number of satellites strongly drives the cost of a
constellation. If we select the low-Earth orbit approach for FueSat, how many satellites should the operational constellation contain? More satellites means better
coverage and, therefore, reduces the time from when a fire starts until it is first detected. Consequently, one of our key parameters is the time late, that is, the time from
when a fire starts until the system detects its presence and transinits the information to
the ground. Figure 3-5 plots the hypothetical time late vs. the number of satellites for

71

Step 9: Mission Concept Selection

3.4

15 ~------r-----~~----~------~------'

o
2

4

6

8

10

Number of Satellites

Rg. 3-5.

HypotheUcal Coverage Data for RreSat. See text for definitions and dlscussIon. As
discussed In Sec. 7.5, sateUite growth comes in Increments or plateaus. These are
assumed to be 2-satelllte Increments for AreSal

If we assume an initial goal for time late of no more than 5 hours, we see from the
plot that a system of 6 satellites can meet this goal. Alternatively, a 4-satellite system
can achieve a time late of 6 hours. Is the smaller time late worth the increased number
of satellites and the money to build them? Only the ultimate users of the system can
judge. The additional warning may be critical to fue containment and, therefore, a key
to mission success. However, it is also possible that the original goal was somewhat
arbitrary, and a time of approximately 5 hours is what is really needed. In this case,
fue-fighting resources could probably be used better by flying a 4-satellite system with
6 hours time late and applying the savings to other purposes. Again, mission utility
analysis simply provides quantitative data for intelligent decision making.
Of course, we must remember that the number of FireSat satellites will depend not
only on the utility analysis but also on politics, schedules, and resources. The public
must see FtreSat as an appropriate response to the problem, as well as an efficient use
of scarce economic resources compared to, for example, more fire fighters. In addition, a satellite system may serve several missions, with multiple mission criteria and
needs. Just as we cannot apply only one criterion to some system drivers, we may not
be able to balance numerically the several criteria for mission selection. Ins~ the
developers, operators, and users must balance them using the insight gained from the
system trades and mission utility analysis.
Having undertaken a round of system trades, evaluated the mission utility, and
selected one or more baseline approaches, we are ready to return to the issue of system

72

Mission Evaluation

3.4

requirements and their flow-down to various components. Chapter 4 treats this area,
which is simply the next step in the iterative process of exploring concepts and defining requirements.

Chapter 4

References
Brookner, Eli, and Thomas F. Mahoney. 1986. ''Derivation of a Satellite Radar Architecture for Air Surveillance." Microwave Journal. 173-191.

Requirements Dermition

Cantafio, Leopold J., ed. 1989. Space-Based Radar Handbook. Norwood, MA:
Artech House.

Stanley I. Weiss, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Michael S. Williams, Lockheed Martin Global Telecommunications

Defense Systems Management College. 1990. System Engineering Management
Guide. Ft Belvoir, VA: U.S. Government Printing Office.
.
Fortescue, P., and J. Stark. 1995. Spacecraft Systems Engineering (2nd Edition). New
York: John Wiley & Sons.
Johnson, Richard D., and Charles Holbrow, eds. 1977. Space Settlements, A Design
Study. NASA SP-413. Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Kay, W.D. 1995. Can Democracies Fly in Space? The Challenge of Revitalizing the
U.S. Space Program. Westport, Cf: Praeger Publishing
O'Neill, Gerald. 1974. "The Colonization of Space." Physics Today. 27:32-40.
Przemieniecki, J.S. 1990~ Introduction to Mathematical Methods in Defense Analysis. Washington, DC: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
- - -..I990b. Defense Analysis Software. WaShington, DC: American Institute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics.

---.1993. Acquisition of Defense Systems. Washington, DC: American Institute

of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.

- - - . 1994. Mathematical Models in Defense Analysis. Washington, DC: American
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.
Rechtin, Eberhardt. 1991. Systems Architecting. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Shishko, Robert. 1995. NASA Systems Engineering Handbook. National Aeronautics
and Space Administration.
Shishko, Robert, et al. 1996. ''Design-ta-Cost for Space Missions." Chapter 7 in
Reducing Space Mission Cost, James R. Wertz and Wiley J. Larson, eds. Torrance,
CA: Microcosm Press and Dordrecht. The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.

4.1

4.2

4.3
4.4

Role of Requjrements in System Development
Quality Function Deployment-A Toolfor
Requirements Development
Requirements Analysis and Performance Budgeting
Functional Analysis; Initial Performance Budgets;
Refining and Negotiating the Performance Budgets
Requirements Documentation and Specifications
Summary:The Steps to a Requirements Baseline

An early adage in systems engineering was "requirements before analysis, requirements before design." This emphasizes the importance of defining and developing
requirements as the front-end process for system design, development. and deployment. Regardless of su;e and complexity, and whatever the formality and scope of this
process, it should follow the general pattern described in this chapter.
All requirements must begin with succinct but well dermed user and customer
mission needs, focusing on the critical functional and operational requirements, without unnecessarily constraining or dictating the design. Section 4.1 shows that the
requirements derived from these mission needs and progressively allocated to lower
levels of the design are central to meeting a program's performance commitments.
Section 4.2 describes the process of analyzing requirements and budgeting performance. As we derive functions and the associated performance requirements, we must
document them to provide the basis for developing, producing, deploying, and operating the system, as well as a referencable history governing the development. Section
4.3 shows the role of requirements documentation. F'mally, Sec. 4.4 summarizes a
brief step-by-step method of establishing requirements for typical space mission
programs.
This traditional approach to systems engineering is to first derme the requirements
and then design the system to meet those requirements at minimum cost and risk. More
recently a number of authors and organizations have advocated ''trading on requirements" as a formal process intended to provide a compromise between what the user
wants and what the buyer can afford. This process is discussed in detail by Wertz and
Larson [1996J.

73

74

Requirements. Definition

4.1

4.1 Role of Requirements in System Development
To this point, the book has dealt with the mission analysis and concept development
process which ideally drives the system design. The mission objectives and system
concepts we have adopted have involved five basic measures: (1) required performance,.(2) cost, (3) ~velopment and deployment schedule, (4) implicit and explicit
co~~ts, and (5) nsk. The same meas~ continue to apply during the entire system
englDeenng process, from concept to lDlplementation. Through this process, we
decompose and allocate the central system-derived requirements (sometimes
expressed as system specifications) to individual segments or system elements, interfaces between these as well as·interfaces external to the system. To define the total
system, therefore, users, customers, system engineers, and segment developers must
co~tantly interact. Although we initiate the process in a "top-down" fashion, we
typically must continually reconcile system level requirements with technology and
lower-level design development.
A healthy tension often exists between the user and development communities.
~vel?~ may consider ~e user wedded to current operational approaches and
lDsensltive to how over-specified requirements constrain design. Users often believe
that developers favor new technology and ignore the practical needs associated with
operating a system and exploiting the mission data. Thus, the developer may establish
mission requirements without consulting the user, or the user may produce "nonnegotiable stone tablets" and carry them down from the mountain too late or too overspecified for actual use. Because both sides have valid concerns, however, they must
cooperate from the start in developing the mission's operational requirements. We
may implement this cooperation through so-called IPrs (Integrated Product Teams)
involving both users/customers and developers.
Typically, developers wanting to build as soon as possible drive prematurely
toward low-level detail. Sometimes they underemphasize the original mission drivers
-requirements which dominate performance, cost, and schedule risk. Customers
often constrain system development with overly specific requirements at levels below
the critical requirements that determine most of a program's cost and risk. While the
level of formality and detail may vary depending upon system maturity, complexity,
and size, critical requirements must remain in the forefront during design. development, and validation of the system.
Overzealous requirements can also find their way into mission statements. For
example, a user may specify the scan rate and swath width under payload and coverage
~on.nan~e. Clearly,. these cons~ts on sensor design and constellation are inappro~nat~ lD this case,. pnor to establishing a system which meets the key requirements,
I.e., timely data WIth enough accuracy and resolution. Specifications on launch rate,
launch responsiveness, and spacecraft reliability are also common. But so long as a
system meets availability and maximum outage needs, the developer should be able to
allocate requirements for reliability, maintenance, and replacement. Mission requirements concerning launch, operation, or maintenance may establish the design domain
but .not di~tate the design. On the other hand, the user must also be a party to the syste~
desIgn as It converges, to identify design characteristics likely to produce operational
problems.
Table 1-5 in Sec. 1.4 shows essential requirements for the FJreSat mission. These
req~ments ?either d!ctate nor impose needless constraints on design, but they do
Specify what IS essential to perform the mission and operate the system. The table

4.1

Role of Requirements. in System Development

75

contains enough information to derive the specific design characteristics with
sufficient controls on the user's essential requirements. Also, the table includes no
unverifiable terms or goals such as ''maximize,'' "sufficient," or "optimize," because
these words have no quantifiable interpretations. Requirements which we are asked to
implement only if no "impact" results, are in fact goals and we cannot treat them as
design dri,:ers. Every meanin~ requirement bears cost and will have an impact
Co~ts are those reqUIrements for a system which we cannot trade, usually
under any crrcumstances. Th~y may pertain to performance when levels of capability
of a sy~tem must have a ~ valu~ to be useful. One example is the necessity for a
resolution level of an optical or RF SIgnal, above which the desired information could
not be derived or would not be sufficiently better than existing systems to justify new
development. A related, fixed requirement could also be coverage and timeliness of
data, clearly a major consideration for FJreSat. Another might be cost-a constraint
increasingly important to the financial success of a new mission. Thus, if a cost ceiling
ofN millions could not be met for a new development, the feasibility, design attn'butes
or method of achieving a mission would 00 directly affected. The term "design to cost"
applies directly to a cost constraint. Schedule may also be a constraint, and many technically worthwhile projects get scrubbed because developers could not solve some
problems soon enough to be competitive-this is often called a ''time to market" cons~t. Others, but by no means all, include environmental and safety issues, legal and
political mandates, fixed asset usage, involvement of geographically distributed or
foreign offset contractors.
An alternative view of "goals" vs. ''requirements" is that the former represent
design margin. Any firm requirement must result in a level of margin in the design.
and we ~ regard the "goal" as specifying the desired margin. As the design matures.
the margm represents the trade-space available to decision-makers. The user must
ultimately decide whether the additional performance is worth its associated incremental cost.
Designers often focus on performance areas, such as operating the payload and
distributing. the. ~sion data, and ~deremphasize the more mundane requirements.
such as availability and accommodation to the external environment. Yet these can be
cri?c~ .to cost and risk. F~r example, availability can demand increased component
~hab~ty and ~erefore raise development costs. It can drive maintenance concepts,
~cluding ~1.eD1Shment and on-o,rbit ~Pp?rt. It. can also affect production time, especIally for cntical components. likewise, Ignormg external interfaces can produce a
system design without the external support needed to deploy and operate the mission.
When space systems perform more than one mission, planners must develoP
requirements which account for each mission. For example, the IR surveillance
pa>:load o,n FlreSat may serve o~er users with its performance in IR imaging and
radiometric measurement. If the mcreased cost and risk are acceptable, their requiremen~ could lead to more payload bands, added coverage, and added distribution
reqUIrements. That is why we must establish all valid missions early in requirements
definition, or we should incorporate accommodations for new missions in future
upgrades to a system's capabilities.
While we must address system requirements throughout all aspects of the
development cycle, the role and characteristics of requirements change in each development phase. Consequently, we should use specific structure and language early in
the ~ss without premature detail. Table 4-1 shows how the requirements converge
dunng system development. Concept development must continue to reflect the driving

Requirements Definition

76

4.1

requirements, including internal and external interfaces. Top level or mission
requirements drive early activities-developing the sy,stem concept and assessing
technology. We must be prepared to modify these as the concepts and design mature
and cause re-evaluation.
TABLE 4-1.

Evolution of Requirements Activities and Products. Each development phase
tends to focus on specific requirement and design considerations.

Needs Analysis
• Defining mission requirements
• Defining environment
• IdenUfying mission drivers and constraints
• Technology programs
Concept Development
• Identifying critical driving requirements and associated risks
• Developing operations and design concepts
• Cost estimetes
• Functional analysis and major interfaces
• System studies and simulations
• Prototyping and assessing technoiogy
Concept Validation
• Tailored system and segment definitions
• Preliminary internal interface requirements
• Preliminary system standards
• Preliminary requirements fiowdown
• integrated system validation inciuding test planning
• Transition planning
• Validating technology
Design and Implementation
• Detailed requirements fiowdown
• Deveioping forrnaI design documentation and Interface control
• Integrating and testing the system
• Demonstrating and verifying the system
• Test procedures and reports

During concept development, we normally carry forward and evaluate many design
options, so we need to specify and document requirements in critical areas in a flexible
fashion. We generally don't require formal specifications complying with acquisition
standards and serving as the legal basis for the system until full-scale development. At
that point, we need to have solved the critical program risk areas. Until then, however,
there are no set prescriptions for the requirements products other than what the pr0gram fmds applicable and workable.
We should, of course, recognize that the spectrum of valid approaches for requirements development and application is broad. Significant differences exist among
NASA, 000, ESA, NASDA and other development agencies, as well as their contractors, and even among locations within the same organization. For example, all

4.1

Role of Requirements in System Development

77

NASA organizations conduct Phase A and Phase B studies which result ultimately in
a Request for Proposal, including top-level specifications. But they vary widely in
their approaches to conducting these studies and their requirements products. For 000
organizations, the rituals of MIL-STD-499 have often overwhelmed arguments based
on unique program needs, and requirements become over-detailed and over-formalized too early. In full-scale development, most of the requirements activities center on
integrating program interfaces (inter-segment and external to the system) and resolving ways of carrying out specific requirements at segment level. Solving major system
issues at this point can be expensive and risky. Usually, we freeze requirements once
the system passes into production. Rarely can a program afford to accept changes at
this point, opting far more often to accept limits to the system as designed or to defer
the change to a later upgrade.
We often hear that requirements drive technology programs, but in fact, new
technologies frequently make systems possible. For example, improvements in
bandwidth for communications processing have permitted greater use of real-time
data downlinks. But relying on new technologies or production abilities can be risky.
New technologies which allow us to reduce design specifications for power, weight,
and volume can improve system performance and cost. We must, however, monitor
the technology and production base and carry backup plans, in case program risk
management demands changes to basic design requirements and interfaces to reallocate performance.
Although the success of every program hinges on perfonruince, cost, and schedule,
cost is typically the most constraining. One reaction to cost emphasis is the design-tocost practice by which a fixed dollar amount affects possible design solutions. Thus,
progressive design development may, under cost limitations, cause review of requirements, with attendant trades between cost and performance. This has clearly been a
factor in the design and functions of the International Space Station (ISS). We can do
much to control program costs while analyzing requirements. For instance, overspecified requirements may be "safe," but evaluation of necessary design margins
early via close interaction between the developer and the requirements specifier
permits us to make timely trades.
As discussed earlier, defining requirements without attending to production and
operational support is also costly. Thus, with every major decision, we must consider
which performance option meets essential requirements while minimizing cost.
Sometimes, standardizing can reduce costs and improve operability. For example.
particularly in the commercial communications industry, use of a "standard bus" or
basic vehicle can yield lower costs for many programs. We sometimes call this process
"platform-based design." In addressing approaches to standardization, however, we
must always consider trade-offs between reduced cost and increased development
risk.
As shown in Chaps. 1-3, mission development is an iterative process. Although
each stage seems to cascade forward without hesitation, each requires significant feedback and adjustments. Typically, most of the feedback occurs between adjacent phases
of development. However, some situations may demand feedback across multiple
phases, such as when an element design falls short on a particular requirement and
causes a change in the design and operations concept, and possibly a change to the
original schedule.
An aside on requirements and cost control is imperative here. Solutions to
constraining cost (e.g., design-to-cost specification, imposed standardization) are

78

Requirements Definition

4.1

difficult to implement in truly innovative space systems. In fact, well-intentioned
aPIm>aches early in the design cycle may result in serious cost growth later in design
and operation. But this difficulty in explicit cost control does not imply we should
avoid the challenge. The growth in cost from the early estimates performed during
Concept Development is typically driven by a few controllable problems. Frrst, not
fully accounting for all elements of cost in these early estimates is common. Frequently, not consulting with designers and manufacturers who will develop the system
and the operators who will control the system results in misunderstanding cost or missing elements of cost. Second. overspecifying the system inhibits trades which we can
focus on cost reduction. Fmally (and probably the most prevalent problem), heavy and
uncontrolled changes to requirements as the system proceeds through latter stages of
design can create major growth in cost due to constant redesign and related material
and time waste. Worse, the loss of a fully understood system baseline becomes more
likely and potentially very costly later in the program. The process of defining and
flowing down requirements affects cost more than any other program activity.
.
Then, too, on several occasions, customer requirements accepted without rational
. challenge have led to unjustifiable project costs and. in two well-documented cases,
eventually caused cancellation. One of the authors once had the opportunity to
convince a customer that a new requirement that was inserted after program start
would not enhance the mission; millions of dollars were saved and the customer's
belief in our integrity was solidified.

Role of Requirements in System Development

4.1

Rg. 4-1.

79

Abbreviated House of Quality.

4.1.1 Quality Function Deploym.ent-A Tool for Requirements Development

While there are several structured approaches to developing requirements from the
customerluser needs, the most commonly used tool is Quality Function Deployment,
or QFD. Its application is not product limited; we also use it in developing of
requirements for processes and services.
Quality Function Deployment derives from three Japanese words or characters
meaning (1) quality or features, (2) function or mechanization, and (3) deployment or
evaluation. Symbolically we define the combination as "attribute and function
development."It involves a series of matrices organized to define system characteristics and attributes and can be applicable over multiple areas of decomposition. The
frrst level, connecting customer needs or requirements to technical attributes or
requirements, we often called the House ofQuality and configure it in its simplest form
as in Fig. 4-1. We often call the left hand colunm the "Whati' (at this first level, this
is called the ''voice of the customer") and we call the horizontal attributes the "Hows."
This relationship will become apparent as the "Hows" define the means for fulfilling
the "Whats."
Weightings are applied to the "what" side of the matrix and are usually graded in
three levels to help establish priorities of needs and related technical attributes. While
of value in trading requirements, the primary use at this stage should be to define trade
space.
Figure 4-2 shows a simplified application to FrreSat. Referring to Table 1-5 and
illustrating with only a few of the identified mission needs, an abbreviated matrix
shows some five needs and six relevant attributes. Note the conflicts between competing satellite orbits which could. potentially satisfy key requirements. This suggests
carrying out extensive analysis and trades. Note also the relative priorities emphasizing technical attributes which assure timely coverage.

Da!Iy Coverage

9

9

9

30 min Response

3

3

3

98% AvalJabIJHy

9

9

9

LocatIon Accuracy

9

9

9

l:

12

12

3
9
9

9

12

18

WelghIIng:
9: HIghest Imporlam:e
3: Medium ImporIam:e
1: Lowest ImporIam:e

++
21

21

++++++

Rg. 4-2.

Simplified QFD for RreSat Mission. This limited set of needs and responding technical attributes would be expanded significantly for the complete design process.

Recalling the discussion on constraints (at the end of Sec. 4.1), we understand that
the customer needs that the system cost no more than $20 million per year of 0peration; that is a constraint and all needs and technical attributes must meet this criterion.
Thus, while it is a fixed requirement, we may leave it off the customer needs column
of the QFD so as not to overbalance weighted scoring. If it were stated as having a
target cost of $20 million or less, we might trade that figure and put it on the left hamd
side of the matrix. As a next stage.use of QFD, the technical attributes developed in
the top level would then become the requirements or "what" (left side) of the QFD

4.2

Requirements DefiDition

80

matrix, with definitive characteristics, such as specific orbits, coverage per pass or unit
time and top reliability level which we would derive to satisfy the set of specified technical requirements. ~gure 4-3 illustrates this progression.

Aeonm=

A

.-<:xxxxX

T_

SysIem Func!1ons

f--and ChamcIerIsIIcs

ChamcIerIsIIcs

i
'i ;:

UI

~

l: WeIgIded Score

System RequIrements

Phase

t

Requirements Analysis and Performance Budgeting

81

Figure 4-4 shows how a single mission need-the FJreSat geopositioning errorflows through ~y levels of design. Errors in the final mission data depend on many
sodaurces of error m the processing segments for space, mission control, and mission
ta.

,

A

DesIgn

-

II

4.2

RequIremenIsI

SpeciIlcaIJDns

-

II
f

Concept
Phase

PreDmJnary
DesIgn Phase

~

RequIrements SpecifIed
forllelalJ DesIgn

Rg. 4-3.

Progression of QFO Process. Illustrated Is the derivation of successive "What"

aspects from previous levels' responsive "Hows.D

Thus the QFD is a structured means for a design team to address customer needs
and to develop the consequent design characteristics to satisfy them. It also serves to
sustain the trail of requirements derivation and provides a means for analyzing the
impact of changes to requirements at any level. And since We can link the technical
attributes responsive to needs, to functions of the system, there is a logical translation
to functional analysis via functional flow diagrams and thence architecture and interface defmitions.
As an added note regarding understanding the customer, I know of several satellite
projects that have had little success as commercial ventures because the contractor's
designers established requirements based on their own interpretation of potential
customer needs. This was also the cause of a major military satellite contract loss to
the competition due to inaccurately presumed knowledge of customer's desires. The
voice of the customer must be heard before fixing a design.

4.2 Requirements Analysis and Performance Budgeting
We must decompose every system requirement into progressively lower levels of
design by defining the lower-level functions which determine how each function must
be performed. Allocation assigns the function and its associated performance requirement to a lower level design element. Decomposing and allocating starts at the system
level, where requirements derive directly from mission needs, and proceeds through
segment, subsystem, and component design levels. This process must also ensure
closure at the next higher level. Closure means that satisfying lower-level requirements ensures performance at the next higher level, and that we can trace all
requirements back to satisfying mission needs. This emphasizes the iterative character
of the requirements development process.

Rg. 4-4.

Allocation from MIssion Requirements through Component Design. UnderStandIng the sources contributing to top-level requirements Is essential.

Two important observations are necessmy. Frrst, the system encompasses more
than the spacecraft, and errors come from numerous segments. The accuracy of the
geolocated object in a FJreSat image is driven by much more than the spacecraft's

Requirements DefiDition

82

4.2

pointing capability. Second, while the,number of error sources is large, they are not
all equal. Many are predictable and relatively constant-star catalogs and Earth
ellipsoid estimates. Others are more variable, but small and not significant drivers for
cost or technology. The remaining errors are those which are most amenable to
cost-performance-risk trade-offs and need the greatest level of attention during
requirements flowdown and validation.
4~1

Functional Analysis
The simplest way to represent functiOllS-QI' actions by or within each element of
a system-is through a functional-flow block diagram. As Fig. 4-5 shows, we define
the topmost or first level functions of a system in the sequence in which they occur.
Successive decomposition permits identifying how a system works at each level
before proceeding to lower levels. For example, to address sensor misalignment three
levels down in the functional flow (Function 4.4.4 in Fig. 4-5), it is necessary to
consider the production (1.0) and integration (2.0) phases, which require manufacture
and validation within reasonable tolerances.

TOP
LEVEL
FLOW

SECOND

LEVEL

--

"7

~
EsIlmaIa
InmIfaI Forest
fire

CoordInaIes

~4
ConvertID
THIRD
UdIIong &
LEVEL
LocaJ Map
CoordInaIes

4.4.3

EsIlmaIa

~
Sensor PDlntlng
Angle

FIg. 4-5.

Functional Flows Generating GeoposlUonlng Information for FlreSat Mission.
The functional flow defines what Is to be done In a hierarchical framework. Additional
features can be added to the representation (e.g., data Interfaces, control sequences)
using different diagramming techniques.

4.2

Requirements Analysis and Performance Budgeting

83

Once we establish the top-level functions and sequences, we can decompose and
analyze each function throughout the remaining layers of the flow. For example,
determining geopositioning data (Function 4.4 in Fig. 4-5) for FrreSat requires- a
sequence of actions, from estimating key spacecraft and payload parameters to deriving local Earth coordinates. Functional decomposition, regardless of how formalized,
is neceSsary .in allocating design c~cteristics at each level of system architecture
(the organization of system elements into a structured hierarchy). This organization
permits us to allocate performance budgets together with other budgets affecting cost
and risk.
We can also use functional flow diagrams to depict information or data flow, as
well as control gates governing function sequencing. Information may include interface data flowing between functions, control relationships showing what must happen
before another function can begin, or data sources and destinations.
In applying these techniques, we may use manual methods, particularly for simple
systems, for top-level mission descriptions, but CASE (computer-aided system engineering) tools facilitate diagramming decompositions and maintaining traceability.
But as with other computer applications, the software for developing diagrams and
maintaining support databases does not drive the analysis. In fact, the functional
framework which evolves is often a compromise among estimates of performance,
cost, schedule, and the risk associated with each decision. (McClure [1988] and
INCOSE Sixth Annual Proceedings [1996] provides an interesting discussion of support tools and techniques.)
4.2.2 Initial Performance Budgets
Analyzing requirements leads eventually to hierarchically organized performance
metrics and budgets for the interactive development segments. The iterative process
starts with budgets derived using analysis, simulation, known design or test data, and
a large measure of experience. We should note that in the development of requirements and derived functions, mission drivers must be the primary drivers.
Experience or related reference missions are especially important in developing the
initial performance budgets to meet system performance requirements. In the example
of Fig. 4-5, the geopositioning accuracy reflects this. The major trade-offs and focus
for validating performance therefore reside in how accurately the system can estimate
and control position and attitude, and we must evaluate the options considered against
not only performance requirements but alsO cost and schedule.
Figure 4-6 illustrates the combined effect of spacecraft attitude and position errors
on the geopositioning estimate's accuracy in locating fires. In this simple example,
three broad options are possible. The first option gives a very loose spacecraft position
budget, which permits only limited support from the GPS and/or remote tracking stations. However, it requires a tight attitude budget, which is likely to create problems
for both the space and mission control segments. Though payload sensitivity and
resolution drive the selection of the FrreSat orbit envelope, using a low-Earth orbit
could severely affect attitude accuracy because of atmospheric drag. A higher altitude
would reduce drag, but produce even tighter pointing tolerances. Thus, two main costs
make this a poor budget option: the satellite's subsystem for controlling attitude and
the potentially taxing calibration which the mission control segment must perform on
the attitude sensors.
At the other ex·treme, leaving the attitude budget loose and tightly estimating spacecraft position can have risks if a full GPS constellation is not in operation. Using GPS

Requirements Definition

84

4.2

Requirements Analysis and Performance Budgeting

4.2

85

TABLE 4-2. Elements FrequenUy Budgeted In Space Mission DesIgn. Primary budgets are
dlrectiy related to mission requirements or ability to achieve the mission (e.g.,
weight). These primary requirements then flow down Into secondary budgets.
Position
Error

Design Margin
A

A

T
T

T
T
I

T

AttiIude
Error

p

Geoposilioning
Error

S
I
T
I

Subsystem weight
Power
Propellant

Secs.10.3,10.4
Sees. 10.3, 10.4. 11.4
Sees. 10.3, 10.4, 17.4

Geolocatlon or System
PoIntIng Errors

Pointing & Alignment
Mapping
Attitude Control
Attitude Determination
Position Determination

Sees. 5.4,10.4.2,11.1

A

T
T
I

T

u

p
0

Tuning

S
I

T

Other Errors

Altitude
Budget } Tight

Moderate

Loose

Position
Budget } Loose

Moderate

TIght

Typical Options In Error Budgets for Attitude and PoslOon. Variations in attitude
and ephemeris accuracy requirements have implications on aDocation and attendant
design risk. A balance of cost, performance, and implementation risk must enter the
evaluation of options. Detans of mapping budget development are given in Sec. 5.4.

ris~ degraded perfonnance without a full constellation. Resorting to remote tracking

stations or other sources of infonnation can require excessive response times. A third
option allows some risk for both attitude and position error budgets, but balances that
risk against the cost of achieving the required geopositioning accuracy.
Table 4-2 lists the elements we would nonnally budget with the chapter and paragraph where we discuss each element. Budgeted items may come directly from
requirements such as geolocation or timing, or they may be related to elements of the
overall system design such as subsystem weight, power, or propellant.
Timeline budgets at the system level are also typical mission drivers. For FireSat,
~~t timelines for tip-off response and data distribution will require developing an
Imtial budget. We must define and decompose all functions necessary to meet this
timeline, as well as define their allocation and control sequences (functions which cannot start without completion of others and potential data hand-offs). Simulation will
help us estimate delays in processing and communication. Applying experience or
~ from related systems provides some calibration. But this initial budget is just that,
smce as the design process progresses, we will introduce changes from design iterations among different levels.
It is, however, extremely important to recognize the nature of initial design budgets.
They are typically developed by system engineers with a broad understanding of the

Where Discussed

Weight

0
E

0

0
N

Fig. 4-6.

Secondary

Primary

500

Coverage
Communications
Operations
Processing

Sec. 5.4

Sees. 4.2. 10.4.2, 11.1
Sees. 4.2. 10.4.2, 11.1
Sees. 4.2. 6.1
Sees. 5.2, 7.2
·Sec.13.1
Sec. 14.2
Sec. 16.2.1

AV811ab1lity

Reliability
Operations

Sees. 10.5.2, 19.2

Cost

Development cost
Deployment cost
Operations and maintenance cost

Sec. 20.3
Sec. 20.3
Sec. 20.3

Sec. 14.2

system and its elements. But the details of new technology and lower-level design
studies can and should result in adjustments to these budgets as experts familiar with
specific subsystem and component design review t1!e initial allocations. A key aspect
of the system design is a robust initial allocation (i.e., one which can tolerate changes
at subsequently lower design levels) and adaptable to iterations as noted previously.'
Just as it is important to involve representatives of all affected levels of design in the
development of the initial budgets. it is also important to recognize the iterative nature
and that a system solution which minimizes total cost and risk may impose more
stringent demands on certain aspects of lower-level designs than others. The process
of reconciling the imposed costs and allocated risks involves a high degree of
negotiation.
Table 4-3 shows how the response timeline may affect the space and ground
segments of the system. While it may seem desirable to assign responsibility for a
specified perfonnance parameter to a single segment, we must evaluate and integrate
critical system parameters across segments. For example, F1reSat must respond
quickly to tip-offs in order to provide the user timely data on suspected fires. This single response requirement alone may define the size and orbit envelope of the satellite
constellation to ensure coverage when needed. Thus, time budgets for the following
chain of events will be critical to the mission control segment's performance:
• Fonnulating the schedule for pass & time intervals
• Developing and scheduling commands to the spacecraft
• Developing.and checking constraints on the command load
• Establishing communications with the spacecraft

86

Requirements Definidon

4.2

TABLE 4-3. Impact of Response-TIme Requirement on FJreSafs Space and Ground Seg_
ments. The assumed requirement Is for fire data to be registered to a map base and
delivered to a user within 30 min of acquisition.

4.2

Requirements Analysis and Performance Budgedng

Detectable Fire

I_

Time Segment 1

A.

Actual
Detectfon

The space and ground segment budgets may involve interrupting current command
loads, maneuvering the spacecraft, collecting the mission data, establishing communications links scheduled from the ground, and communicating the mission data. Mission data processing must receive, store, and process the mission data, sort it by user
or by required media, and send it to the user. We must consider all of these activities
in establishing budgets to meet the system requirement of delivering specified data and
format within 30 min of acquiring it.
Requirements Budget Allocation Example
.Poin~g budget development, described in Sec. 5.4, is a problem on space missions
usmg pomtable sensors. Another common budget example is the timing delay associated with getting mission data to end users. It can be a critical requirement for system
design, as is the case of detecting booster plume signatures 8ssoclated with ballistic
missile launches. In that case, coverage (i.e., the time from initiation of a launch to
initial detection) as well as the subsequent transmission, processing, distribution, and
interpretation of the detection, is time critical. Because of the severe coverage requirement, geosynchronous satellites with sensitive payloads and rapid processing are
needed.
The FrreSat mission does not require timing nearly as critical as missile detection,
but clearly the detection of forest fires is a time-sensitive problem. Figure 4-7 shows
both the timeline and the requirements budget associated with it. For FrreSat's Earth
coverage (i.e., Tune Segment 1), it would be ideal to provide continuous surveillance
using a geosynchronous satellite. However, cost and groUnd resolution favor a lowEarth orbit implementation which results in Tune Segment 1 being three to six hours,
depending principally on the number of satellites in the constellation.
Once detection occurs, a series of shorter timeline events must occur to achieve the
30-minute requirement for Tune Segment 2. The system may need to validate each
detection to minimize the number of false alarms transmitted to the ground for
processing. This may impose design specifications for onboard detection processing
and additional payload "looks." The time spent downlinking the data after validating
a detection could have a significant impact on the communications architecture that
assures rapid acquisition of the required links. The aVailability of direct or relay links

A

1\

Impact on Space Segment
Spacecraft constellation accessibility to specified Earth coordinates
Command loed accept or Interrupt tlrnellnes
Communication tlmellnes to ground segments
Satellite avallabHity
Impact on Ground Segment
Time to determine and arbitrate sateDite operations schedule
Manual Interrupt of scheduled operations
Command load generation and constraint checking time
AvaHabllJly of mission ground segments and communications
Image processing tlmellnes
lmege sorting and distribution tlmeUnes

MlssIon Data
to End User

to + 3.5-6.5 hr

Valida- Down- Goo
Prep. Select/Queue Mission Data
Datecllon lion
Unk Process Confirm Data Distribution to End Usere

" " " I" " ""
~

"

~

30 min

1lme Segment 2

'rime Segment 1 RequIrements
Time to Actual Detectfon ~ Coverage (Number of Spacecraft, Orbit, EIev. Angle)
--.....,.. DetectIon Time GIven Coverege
(Payload Scan OptIons & Sensitivity

,

I~

TIme Segment 2 Requirements

Allocation
InIIIeI YaIDdatIon (PDIPFA, No. of Hits.
Processing Time GIven DatecUon)

1 min

Downlink CUnk Avail•• Unk AcquIsition! Closure)
Orbit and Attitude Datarmlnallon
Ground Look Point Determination

3 min
6 min
2 min

~on of Ground Proc:essIna (Front End Pro- 3 min

Time from Detectfon
to Data DaUvery

Arch.. No. of Channels, Process. Rate)
ConfIrmatIon of FIre (Auto YS.. Manual. Number
of Exploitere and Workstations)
Dete Preparation (SortIng. Formatting. Internal
Routing)

3 min

2 min

Queuing for User Distribution (Sorting. DIsIrfbutIon, 3 min
Queue Processing)

Distribution to End User (Network Mgmt. Channel 2 min
Rates)
MargIn

Fig. 4-7.

5 min
30 min

Mission Data TImellne and Requirements Budget The actual time from the detection of a fire to distribution of the time-urgent data Is related both to coverage and'
specific timing requirements.

,
to meet this timeline is a sigmticant cost driver, potentially replacing a "store and
dump" approach appropriate for purely scientific missions.
Once the ground sy~tem receives the data it must process the data to format it,
perform orbit, altitude, and ground-look-point determination, and then extract the relevant fire-detection data. A short time requirement here will likely demand real-time
processing and a substantial capacity to support real-time operation. Identification and
s~ent confirmation of a fire prior to broader dissemination may drive either a
bigh. perf~ce pattern-matching process or manual processing in a time-critical
f~~on. ~ce the ~ confirms a fire, the data must be registered and prepared for
distribution to appropriate end users. This preparation may involve merging it with

88

Requirements Definition

Requirements Analysis and Performance Budgeting

4.2

standard data sets to support evaluating the fire at a later time. The data processing
system must also queue the data for distribution over a network. Priorities and protocols may drive the management of input queues and network routing. Figure 4-7
shows the initial allocations for the components of rune Segment 2.
This example punctuates two critical activities: FIrSt, the components of a timeline
must follow the step-by-step functional flow described in 42.1. The functions themselves may be strictly sequential or capable of being processed in parallel to shorten
timelines. Functional representation diagrams and support tools (e.g., built-in simulation) can ease this evaluation. Second, there are numerous performance-cost trade-offs
at each decision point which dictate the time-budget allocations. The objective is to
meet the highest level requirement while equally sharing the potential performance
risk and cost associated with meeting each derived requirement

System Concept

+
System Perlormance

Parameter &

RequIrement Language

System VaJJdatlon ProgramITestbed

System
AIIocaIIon
AnalysIs

"Sbawman"

~
Segment DesIgn
Budget Analyses

CYCLEf

4.2.3 Refining and Negotiating the Performance Budgets

System engineers must thoroughly understand how to develop and define requirements, then allocate and negotiate budgets associated with them. Failure to meet key
budgets can lead to major system problems. Early definition permits the iterative
process of adjusting allocations, margins and even operations well before major cost
or schedule penalties occur.
Performance budgeting and validating key system requirements is the iterative
process, as shown in Fig. 4-8. Before the process can actually start, however, the
specific performance parameter and associated requirement statement must be clear
and traceable to the mission need. The Quality Function Deployment methodology
and several tools make this possible by maintaining the link between the need and the
technical requirement in traceable documentation. Vague, inconsistent, or unquantifiable requirements too often lead to inaccurate understanding, misinterpretation andlor
exploitation. This applies especially to critical areas of system performance which
without early and thorough interaction andlorprototype testing can become expensive
and program-threatening later. We should also note that the iterative process includes
negotiation and re-negotiation of budgets based upon evidence from the design pr0cess and the discovery of errors and "injustices" in the initial allocation.
We know of several programs in which major difficulties have resulted from conflict among requirements. One case involved the difference between operational
availability of ground stations with that of the satellites in a system. Another involved
the selection of the launch vehicle before a design concept was established, the requirements for the latter driving the mass far beyond the booster's lift capability. And
in a third case, the changes in a customer's program management introduced new
requirements for a payload which invalidated the flowdown of the original project
requirements. The response to this required both data and persuasiveness, the latter
being unfortunately insufficient until serious problems arose in the systems design.
An aside is worthwhile at this point on the issue of requirements-level vs. designlevel budgeting. The system-level design is a logical integration or synthesis of
segment designs. Defining functions and their performance requirements and those
interfaces requiring support lays the framework for deciding ''how" to design each
segment For FJreSat, this relates to the accuracy of the geolocation and the allocation
to segments of ephemeris, attitude, and other contributions. The "how" relates to space
segment hardware decisions such as whether to use star sensor or gyro performance to
achieve the required attitude accuracy. But such decisions affect mission operations
which must then schedule star sensor calibration and gyro alignment so the spacecraft

_

Concurrence on Changes

Segment
Prototype Results

I SegmeJ d Response

Negotiation

System-level
Valldallon Testing

CYCLE2

ConsIder o1her
Options

Ag. ~.

FaD

~.... I--I
l
~

DesIgn

iterative Performance Budgeting and Validation. The initial performance budget is
a point of departure for later evaluation of segment design and validation testing. The
design wiil converge to a validated value which may require system-level budget
adjustments to match the changes.

can meet its requirements. Thus, both procedural and data interfaces must be identified
and documented. In addition, mission operations must take into account the spacecraft's system for attitude control to keep from misusing it when scheduling
operations. Likewise, in scheduling calibration or alignment, the mission operators
must know the sensor payload and other electronic package performance characteristics to prevent accidental maneuvers. System and segment specifications provide
system and interface requirements, and lower-level specifications Provide design
requirements, but in fact, the l!ystem engineer and segment designers must interact at
all design levels.
It should be noted that initial budget estimates almost never correspond with design
considerations at lower levels. Clearly, the early budgets are starting points for
negotiation and budget adjustment, to reconcile early system allocations with segment
estimates of design and performance. As we reconcile requirements, we should document them in a requirements reference which changes only with full traceability and.
visibility for all stakeholders such as segment designers, system engineers, and pr0gram managers. (A number of tools may be useful: these include the previously noted
QFDs, plus software packages ranging from Excel to QSS DOORS and Ascent
Logic's RDI) 100.) Each of these critical performance parameters matches an established system and segment budget. These budgets can and normally do change as
developers proceed on the design and validate performance.

90

Requirements DefiDition

4.3

At this stage of budgeting, design margin becomes an issue; specifically, how much
is reasonable to keep, who knows where it is, and who has the authority to adjust it?
Typically, margin is statistical (e.g., two-sigma error requirements), so as it cascades
to various levels of design it can produce significant overdesign and cost. Design
engineers can complicate appropriate adjustment by keeping margin at lower tiers of
design, where it tends not to be visible or usable for reallocation. Here prescription
cannot substitute for judgment. Sometimes, margins can provide robustness against
on-orbit failures, but can also cause problems. For example, too much margin in communication links could actually saturate receivers. Key system requirements must also
have margins, which we can trade or allocate downward, so as to permit meeting realistic performance and reliability with minimum risk.
Once the first cycle of interactions between system and segments personnel has
established the best controlled estimate of key performance budgets we must continue
to test the design we are developing. Configurations should be validated via simulations or prototypes. These early exercises in system integration are important in
developing a consensus that continues through the initial design phase.
At all times a baseline of common requirements must support this process of
analyzing and estimating performance requirements, interacting and negotiating with
segment implementors, and validating the key performance drivers early in the design
phase. The validation exercises use many specific scenarios or point situations to
evaluate performance. Meeting performance budgets in these point situations is
comforting, but not sufficient. Scenarios designed to stress one aspect of system
performance may not provide adequate coverage of other aspects. The converging,
controlled system requirements captured in ~uirements documents, iDterfaces, and
standards are often the only reference for system functions and performance. The
requirements documentation must match the phase of system development in maturity, but it must always reflect the results of analyses, performance budget negotiations,
mid validation exercises-faithfully, openly, and quickly.

4.3 Requirements Documentation and Specifications
In dealing with criteria for requirements documents, we should note the references
governing much of today's systems engineering practice in the aerospace industry.
With the deletion of most military standards in the United States as contractual
requirements, internal documents most often establish and govern system design and
engineering practices. These documents, however, are based largely upon either the
previously controlling MIL-STD-499 or its successor (not issued but availlj.ble in final
draft) 499b, or newer civil organization standards. These include the Electronics
Industries Association (in conjunction. with the International Council on Systems
Engineering) EIAJIS 632, Systems Engineering and the Institute of Electrical and
Electronic Engineering (IEEE) Trial Use standard, and Applicati,on and Management
oflhe Systems Engineering Process, IEEE 1220. Most recently, the International Standards Organization (ISO) moved to incorporate systems engineering in the growing
body of international standards and to develop ISO Standard 15288, System Life
Cycle Processes, which can serve as a framework for activities in the increasingly
global context of the aerospace industry. All of these documents place mission and
requirements development and management at the head of system design processes.
Effective requirements documents must be consistent and complete relative to the
maturity of the system in its development cycle. Consistency means that we should

4.3

Requirements Documentation and Specifications

91

write a performance requirement only once, keep it in a logical place, and position it
appropriately in the hierarchy of established requirements. Completeness depends on
the system's phase of development, but it means that at every level of requirement we
must ensure that we satisfy the next higher level. As an example of completeness, the
geolocation requirement of the FrreSat mission should address all error sources both
in segment and interface documents.
Requirements Traceability
Requirements must be rigorously traceable as we develop, allocate and decompose
or derive them. While computer support tools exist which link and show dependencies

and derivations among requirements, the complexity of the product should govern the
form of the documentation. This form can range from notebooks for small projects to
.sophisticated database systems. We must base every design and decision task on
requirements, and trade studies at any level must.take into account all related requirements, while considering the impact of changes throughout the product (and system)
architecture. Any indexing method will suffice, so long as it permits traceability
upwards as well as across all elements. Requirements documents should specify this
tracing method, however, and the basis for derived requirements must be clearly identifiable. The specific requirements document may be purely electronic, possibly using
the database features of the computer tools. Whatever the documentation form, it must
have a concise entry for every requirement. Each entry should index the documents
and specific paragraphs from which we traced the requirement. Where analysis pr0duced a derived requirement, it should reference the specific technical memo or report
showing the results of the analysis for future use.
Traceability emphasizes the need for effective requirements to be unambiguous and
verifiable to avoid misinterpretation and exploitation. Words such as "optimize" or
"minimize" in specifications cannot govern the design, and they defy verification.
We should note that requirements reviews are necessary corollaries to design
reviews and issues must have the same weight as design issues in readiness decisions
by a program to proceed to its next step of development. We sometimes call these
"gates." Requirements assessments at such review points are critical. They may identify the need to reassess project drivers, including: .
• Accelerate or emphasize particular design areas
• Relax design budgets
• Reallocate requirements
• Consider operational work-arounds
• Acknowledge a program slip
• Revise funding profiles
RequireJpents documentation notionally falls into nine classes (Fig. 4-9). These are
often designated as specifications. The figure w.so shows descriptive or supporting
documents which need to be current with the requirements baseline.
Based on mission needs, analyses, and validation exercises, the system requirements document (usually called "system requirements specification") should cover
every relevant aspect of what the system should do (functions) and how well it should
do it (performance requirements). It should address every aspect of system performance. Since ideally system requirements are the basis for segment requirements, they

Requirements De6oitiOD

4.3

DescriptIve & Supporting
Documen!a

4.4

Summary: The Steps to a RequJrements Baseline

93

In all cases, we must document these agreements at every level of design, usually
in ICDs. At the system level, project managers or system engineers control these,
while internal to segments, this is the responsibility of individual element leaders (see
Chap. 16). Although the content and format of interface documents vary significantly
with products and organizations, elements always addressed include physical and data
or signal interfaces and interactions. Thus pin connections and message formats
clearly must be defined in interface documents; but the characteristics of gyro drift and
star sensor performance (such as nonIinearities of the transfer function, output axis
coupling or star sensor noise) require the same definition level so that the mission
ground station can correctly calibrate them.

4.4 Summary: The Steps to a Requirements BaseHne

• Requirements speclllcatiOIiS
FIg. 4-9.

Requirements DocumentaUon Hierarchy or System Specfflcatlon.

should come before the latter. However, once segments are defined. there may be
trade-Of!s ~ at the system level in response to cost, interface issues, performance limitations, or.schedules related to segment designs.
We should note that among the system plans derived from requirements are test
plans which will reflect validation and verification of these requirements in qualifiCation and acceptance processes. These characteristically are reflections from test spec_
ifications which identify objectives, environments and levels of assembly at which
tests are to be performed.
It should be remembered that requirements specifications, at system and lower
l~v~ls, are p?tentiall>: subject to change. The~fore, they should be designated, "pre111Dl~ary" poor to reVIews at each stage of destgn. During formal design phases, while
reqwrements may have to be traded, the specifications must, like design documents
be subject to rigorous change control.
'
In addition, when requirements specifications at a top level govern more than one
system segment, tailoring to accommodate the specific character of a segment may be
appropriate. This is particularly so with requirements not directly associated with
system performance.
Interface Management

Often, developers overlook or assume external interfaces in the early stages of
system development, but they must be carefully considered With the total system
architecture. Internal to the system, documenting interfaces between segments, usually
through interface control documents or leDs, is the key to integrating and maintaining
relationships between these segments. The system level ICD may be referred to or
included in the system specification. Documents covering critical interfaces, such as
the spacecraft-to-ground segment for FrreSat, can become highly complex. Two
guidelines are important in developing and refining interface documents. Each document normally covers only two segments, although multiple elements within segments
may require consideration of relationships with other segments. In general, we should
avoid designs necessitating such added complexity.

We have commented that we cannot prescribe a single means for establishing
requirements. This chapter does, however, present guidelines for establishing a
requirements baseline in approximately sequential order. This baseline is a reference
not only for establishing the premises for functional design, but also a means of
continually assessing the impact of design decisions on requirements validation. We
can predetermine some requirements, such as constraints on a system. (One example
could be the requirement to use existing NASA ground facilities.) We must recognize
that requirements can and do change and that flexibility in the design process is
necessary to accommodate such change, as in the need to iterate the relationships
among design, functions and requirements. Documentation is also a critical aspect of
the requirements process, for sustaining the baseline reference, as well as providing
the translation for system development of the mission objectives.
TABLE 4-4. Steps to Developing a Requirements Baseline.
1. Identify the customer and user of the product or services. A customer may be a procuring
agent but not the ultimate user and both must be understood.
2. Identify and prioritize customer/user objectives and needs for the mission to be
accomplished.
3. Define internal and external constraints.
4. Translate customer/user needs Into functional attributes and system characteristics.
.Quallty Function Deployment Is one tool to do this.
5. Establish functional requirements for system and provide for decomposition to elements.
6. Establish functional flow and representative for its performance of functions.
7. Translate functional attributes Into technical characteristics which will become the
requirements for the physical system.
8. EstabDsh quantifiable reqUirements from all the above steps.
9. Through the use of block diagrams expressing Interfaces and hardwarelsoftware/data
relationships for the system level.
10. From the architecture expressed by step 9 at the system level, decompose the functional
requirements and characteristics sets to successive lower levels, I.e., the next level
defining the basis of the elements of the system.
11. At all the ~ps above, iteration with preceding activities Is necessary both to test the
assumptions made and to reconcile higher levels of requirements and functional
Implementation.

94

Requirements DefiDition

4.4

In the steps which relate to determining requirements, every requirement must have
at least the following three components: first, ''what" the system is to do (the function);
second, ''how well" it is to perform the function (performance requirement); last, how
we verify the requirement (verification). This last component should be of particular
concern to us early in the requirements develQpment Process, and we should translate
it into a verification and validation plan which will govern the quality and quaIification
test programs.
.
Table 4-4 lists ten steps to establishing a requirements baseline in the early phase
of a development program. It emphasizes activities concerned with analyzing and
validating system requirements versus the design of segments, subsystems, or components. These activities produce a hierarchical baseline of requirements which lead to
allocation throughout a decomposed system.

ChapterS
Space Mission Geometry
James R. Wertz, Microcosm, Inc.
5.1
5.2
5.3

References
Blanchard, B. and W. Fabrycky. 1990. Systems Engineering. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Chubb, W.B., and G.F. McDonough. 1991. System Engineering Handbook MSFCHDBK-1912. Huntsville, AL: NASA Marshall Space Flight Center.
Defense Systems Management College. 1990. System Engineering Management
Guide (3rd Edition). Fl Belvoir, VA: Defense Systems Management College.
Electronic Industries Association. 1998. Standard 632. EIA.
Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineering. 1996. Standard 1220. IEEE
International CounCIl on Systems Engineering. 1998. Systems Engineering Handbook.
INCOSE.
International Council on Systems Engineering. 1996. "Systems Engineering Practices
and Tools." Proceedings of Sixth Annual Symposium.
Lugi, V. Berzins. 1988. ''Rapidly Prototyping Rea1-Time Systems." IEEE Software.
September: 25-36.
McClure, C. 1988. Structured Techniques, The Basis/or CASE. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall, Inc.
Shishko, R. and R.G. Chamberlain. 1992. NASA Systems Engineering Handbook.
Washington, DC: NASA Headquarters.
Wertz, James R. and Wiley J. Larson. 1996. Reducing Space Mission Cost. Torrance,
CA; Microcosm Press and Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic
Publishers

5.4

Introduction to Geometry on the Celestial Sphere
Earth Geometry Viewed from Space
Apparent Motion of Satellites for an Observer OD the Earth
SateUites in Circular Low-Earth Orbit; Satellites in
Geosynchronous Orbit and Above
Development of Mapping and Pointing Budgets

Much spaceflight analysis requires knowing the apparent position and motion of
objects as seen by the spacecraft. This type of analysis deals predominantly, though
not entirely, with directions-only geometry. We want to know how to point the spacecraft or instrument, or how to interpret the view of a spacecraft camera or antenna
pattern. Two formal mechanisms for dealing with directions-only geometry are unit
vectors and the celestial sphere. Unit vectors are more common in most areas of
analysis. However, the celestial sphere provides greatly improved physical insight
which can be critical to the space mission designer. Consequently, we first introduce
the basic concept of using the celestial sphere for directions-only geometry and then
apply the concept to space mission geometry as seen from either the Earth or the spacecraft. Finally, we develop a methodology for dmwing up spacecraft maPPing and
pointing budgets.
To begin any formal problem in space mission geometry, we must first select a
coordinate system. In principle, any coordinate system will do. In practice, selecting
the right one can increase insight into the problem and substantially reduce the
prospect for errors. The most common source of error in space geometry analyses is
incorrectly defining the coordinate systems involved.
To define a coordinate system for space applications, we must first specify two
characteristics: the location of the center and what the coordinate system is fixed with
respect to. Typically, we choose the Earth's center as the coordinate system center for
problems in orbit analysis or geometry on the Earth's surface; we choose tOe
spacecraft's position for problems concerning the apparent position and motion of
objects as seen from the spacecraft. Occasionally, coordinates are centered on a
specific spacecraft instrument when we are interested not only in viewing the outside
world but also in obstructions to the field of view by other spacecraft components.
Typical ways to fix a coordinate system are with respect to inertial space, to tlle
direction of the Earth or some other object being viewed, to the spacecraft, or to an
instrument on the spacecraft. Table 5-1 lists the most common coordinate systems in

95

96

Space Mission Geometry

space mission analysis and their applications. These are illustrated in Fig. 5-1. If you
are uncertain of the coordinate system to select. I recommend beginning problems with
the following:

z

• Earth-centered inertial for orbit problems
• Spacecraft-centered local horizontal for missions viewing the Earth
• Spacecraft-centered inertial for missions viewing anything other than the
Earth

Z----+--J(
Nominal
l
Nadir

,-

I

TABLE 5-1. Common Coordinate Systems Used In Space Applications. Also see Rg. 5-1.
Coordinate

Name
CelestJaJ
(Inert/aI)
Earth-fixed

FlxedwHh
Respect to
Inertial
space"
Earth

Center
Eartht or
spacecraft
Earth

Z-axis or
Pole
Celestial
pole
Earth pole

=celestial

X-axis or
Ref. Point
Vemal equinox

Spacecraft-

Spacecraft

Dafinedby Spacecraft
engineering axistoward
drawings
nadir

Orbit

Spacecraft

fixed

Local
Horizontal

Nadir

Orbit analysis,
astronomy, inertial
motion

Greenwich
meridian

Geolocation,
apparent satellite
motion

Spacecraft axis
in direction of
velocity vector

Position and
orientation of
spacecraft
instruments

Perpendicular

Earth observations,
attitude maneuvers

pole

to nadir toward

y

Applications
y
Nominal Negative

GieenwIch Meridian

OrbitNormaJ

A. Spacecraft·flxed Coordinates

B. Earth-fixed Coordinates

z

velocity vector
Ecliptic

Inertial
space

Sun

EcrJptic
poie

Vernal equinox

Solar system orbits,
lunar/solar
ephemerides

y

" Actually rotating slowly with respect to inertial space. See text for dlscusslon.
t EartlH:entered Inertial coordinates are frequently called Gel (Geocentric Inertial). .
:j: Also called LVLH (Local VerIfcaJ/LocaI Horizontal), RPY (Ro//, Pitch, lfiw), or Local Tangent CoorrIJnates.

Unfortunately, the inertial coordinate system which everyone uses, called celestial
coordinates, is not truly fixed with respect to inertial space-that is, the mean position
of the stars in the vicinity of the Sun. Celestial coordinates are defined by the direction
in space of the Earth's pole, called the celestial pole, and the direction from the Earth
to the Sun on the first day of spring, when the Sun crosses the Earth's equatorial plane
going from south to north. This fundamental reference direction in the sky is known
as the vernal equinox or First Point ofAries.* Unfortunately for mission geometry, the
Earth's axis and, therefore, the vernal equinox precesses around the pole of the Earth's
orbit about the Sun with a period of 26,000 years. This precession of the equinoxes
results in a shift of the position of the vernal equinox relative to the fixed stars at a rate
• The position of the vernal equinox in the sky has been known since before the naming of
constellations. When the zodiacal constellations were given their current names several thousand years ago, the vernal equinox was in Aries, the Ram. Consequently the zodiacal symbol
for the Ram.
or sometimes a capital T (which has a similar appearance), is used for the
vernal equinox. Since that time the vernal equinox has moved through the constellation of
Pisces and is now slowly entering Aquarius, ushering in the "Age of Aquarius.»
-

rr,

x
v~~x

C. Roll, Pitch, and Yaw (RPY) Coordinates
Fig. 5-1.

D. CeIesUaJ Coordinates

Coordinate Systems In Common Use. See Table 5-1 for characteristics.

of 0.014 deglyr. Because of this slow drift, celestial coordinates reqUire a corresponding date to acclU'ately define the position of the vernal equinox. The most commonly
used systems are 1950 coordinotes, 2000 coordinotes, and true of date, or TOD. The
latter coordinates use the same epoch as the orbit parameters and are traditionally used
for spacecraft orbit analysis. The small corrections req~ to maintain :rOD coordinates are conveniently done by standard computer subroutines. !he~ ~ ~t for
precise numerical work, but are not critical for most problm.ns m ~sl~n ~yS1S.
Once we have defined a coordinate system, we can specify a direction m space by
a unit vector or vector of unit magnitude, in that direction. While a unit vector will
have three c~mponents, only two will be independent because the magnitude ?f the
vector must be one. We can also define a unit vector by defining the two coordinates
of its position on the surface of a sphere of unit radius, called .the celestial sphere,
centered on the origin of the coordinate system. Clearly, every umt vector corresponds
to one and only one point on the celestial sphere, and every point on the smface of the

Space Mission Geometry

98

5.1

sphere corresponds to a unique unit-vector, as illustrated in Fig. 5-2. Because either
representation is mathematically correct, we can shift back and forth between them as
the problem demands. lInit vector analysis is typically the most convenient form for
computer computations, while the celestial sphere approach provides the geometrical
and physical insight so important to mission analysis. In Fig. 5-2 it is difficult to
estimate the X. Y, andZ components of the unit vector on the left, whereas we can
easily determine the two coordinates corresponding to a point on the celestial sphere
from the figure on the right. Perhaps more important, the celestial sphere allows us
easily to represent a large collection of points or the trace of a moving vector by simply
draWing a line on the sphere. We will use the celestial sphere thrOughout most of this
chapter, because it ~ves us more physical insight and more ability to convey precise
information in an illustration.

5.1

Introduction to Geometry on the Celestial Sphere

99

or very far, such as the surface of the Earth, the Sun, or stars. Although we will drop
the observer from illustrations after the first few figures, we always assume that the
observer is at the center of the sphere. Having become familiar with the idea of the
observer-centered celestial sphere, we can easily work with points and lines on the
sphere itself, ignoring entirely the unit vectors which they represent

z

.B = Sun Angle

71 = Nadlr Angle

Rg. 5-3.

x
A. Unit vector In 3-D Space

Rg.5-2.

B. Point on Unit Sphere

AHemaUve Representations of Unit Vectors. In (8) it Is clear that the small circle Is
0
0
of 10deg radius centered at (15 ,30 ) and that the single vector Is at (SOD, 40). In (A)
even the quadrant Is difficult to estimate. Also note that the body of the unit vectors
from the center of the sphere can be omitted since any point on the sphere implies a
corresponding unit vector. Thus, the 3-dlmenslonaJ polnUng geometry Is reduced to a
2-dlmenslonaJ representation. See Rg. 5-5 for the definition of notaUon.

5.1 Introduction to Geometry on the Celestial Sphere
The celestial sphere is an imaginary sphere of unit radius centered on the observer,
used to represent directions in space. It comes from classical observational astronomy
and is far older than almost any other modern astronomical concept. The compelling
image of the bowl of the sky at night makes it easy to think of stars and planets moving
on a fixed, distant sphere. We now know, of course, that their distances from us are
vastly different. But the concept of watching and computing the position and motion
of things on the unit celestial sphere remains a very valuable contribution of classical
astronomy to modern spaceflight analysis. Unfortunately, relatively few modern
references are available. By far, the most detailed treatment is provided by Wertz
[2001]. Green [1985], and Smart [1977] provide information on spherical astronomy.
Figure 5-3 illustrates the use of the celestial sphere to represent directions to objects
in space. These objects may be very close, such as other components of the spacecraft,

Use of Celestial Sphere to Represent DIrection of ObJects In Space. The sides of
the triangle are arc lengths. The angles of the triangle are rotation angles.

Points on the celestial sphere represent directions in space, such as the direction to
the Sun, the Moon, or a spacecraft axis. The direction opposite a given direction is
called the antipode, or antipoint, and frequently has a "-I" superscript. Thus, S-l is
the direction opposite the Sun, and is called the antisolar point. Nadir is the direction
to the center of the Earth. The direction opposite nadir is called the zenith. Points on
the sphere may represent either directions to real objects or simply directions in space
with no object associated with them, such as the direction parallel to the axis of the
Earth (the celestial pole) or para1lel to the +Z-axis of a spacecraft coordinate system.
A great circle on the celestial sphere is any circle which divides the sphere into two
equal hemispheres, Any other circle on the sphere is called a small circle. Any part of
a great circle is called an arc or arc segment and is equivalent to a straight line segment
in plane geometry. Thus, the shortest path connecting two stars on the celestial sphere
is the great circle arc connecting the stars. Two points which are not antipoints of each
other determine a unique great circle arc on the celestial sphere.
Given 3 points on the sky, we can connect them with great circle arc segments (If!,
11, and fJ on Fig. 5-3) to construct a spherical triangle. The angles A. 1; and f/I at the
vertices of the spherical triangle are called rotation angles or dihedral angles. The
lengths of arc segments and size of rotation angles are both measured in degrees. However, as illustrated in Fig. 5-4, these are distinctly different measurements. The arc
length represents the side of the spherical triangle, and is equal to the angular separation between 2 points seen on the sky. The rotation angle, which is always measured
about a point on the sphere, represents the angle in a spherical triangle, and is equal to
the dihedral angle between 2 planes. For example, assume that we see the Earth,

Space Mission Geometry

100

5.1

*
,
,,

,

,
,,

" :...

Characteristic

..

..~
~

A. Arc Length Measurement,
L, fromAto
Fig. 5-4.

B

R, from A to Babout C

Moon, and Sun on the spacecraft sky. The arc length between the Sun and the Moon
is the angular separation between them as measured by the observer. The rotation
angle about the Earth between the Sun and the Moon is equal to the angle between 2
planes. The observer, Earth, and Sun form the first plane, and the observer, Earth, and
Moon form the second. Both types of angles are important in mission geometry
problems, and we must clearly understand the distinction between them. Table 5-2
lists the properties of these two basic measurement types.
As shown in Fig. 5-5, the +X-axis is normally toward the reference point on the
equator, and the +Z-axis is toward the positive or North Pole. The great circles through
the poles and perpendicular to the equator are called meridians. The meridian through
any point on the sphere determines the azimuth coordinate of that point Azimuth is the
equivalent of longitude on the Earth's surface, and is measured along the equator. The
azimuth is also equivalent to the rotation angle measured counterclockwise about the
pole from the reference point to the point in question. The second coordinate which
determines the position of any point on the sphere is the elevation or latitude component It is the arc-length distance above or below the equator. The co-latitude or
co-elevation is the arc length from the pole to the point in question. SmaIl circles at a
constant elevation are called parallels. Because a parallel of constant elevation is not
a great circle (except at the equator), the arc length along a pamllel will not be the same
as the arc-length separation between two points. As Table 5-3 shows, several spherical
coordinate systems in common use have special names for the azimuth and elevation
coordinates.
The following equations transform the azimuth, Az, and elevation, El, to the corresponding unit vector coordinates (x, y, z):

Rotation Angle Measurement

Plane angle

Dihedral angle

How Measured
in3-DSpacs

Between 2 Ones

Between 2 planes

How Measured
on Sphere

Between 2 points

About a point or between 2 great circles

Unit of Measure

Degrees or radians Degrees or radians

Component in
Spherical Triangle

Side

Angle

Arc cos (A 'B)

Arc tan [C·(A·B)/«A 'B)-(C· A)(C'B)))

Examples

Nadir angle
Sun angle

AzImuth differencs
Rotation about an axis

How Commonly
Expressed

"Angle from A to B" "Rotation angle from A to B about C"
or "Arc length
between A and B"

Unit vector Equivalent

B. Rotation Angle Measurement,

Arclength
Measurement

SoOd Geometry
EquIvalent

DlstincUon between Arc Length and Rotation Angle Measurements.

Fig. 5-5.

Definition of a Spherical Coordinate System on the Unit Sphere. The point P Is at
an azimuth of 50 deg and elevation of 35 deg, normally written as (50°, 35j.

Similarly, to transform from unit vectors to the corresponding spherical coordinates, use

x = cos (Az) cos (El)

(5-1a)

y = sin (Az) cos (El)

(5-1b)

Az

(5-1c)

El= asin (z)

z=sin (El)

101

TABLE 5-2. ProperUes of Arc Length and Rotation Angle Measurements.

,,*
, .

:.-. . . .r*\\
,,

Introduction to Geometry on the Celestial Sphere

5.1

=atan2 (y/x)

(5-2a)

(5-2b)

102

Space MissIon Geometry

5.]

5.1

Introduction to Geometry on the Celestial Sphere

103

TABLE 5-3. Coordinate Names In Common Spherical Systems.

Coordinate System

AzImuth
Coordinate .

Celestial Coordinates Right ascension

Elevation
Coordinate (Z-axis)

Applications

Declination

Inertial measurements,
Astronomy

Earth-flxed

Longitude

Latitude

Earth appncations

Spacecraft-fixed

AzImuth or clock
angle

Elevation

Spacecraft measurements,
attitude analysis

Local Horizontal

AzImuth

Elevation·

Directions relative to
central observer

Ecliptic Coordinates

Celest/a1longitude Celest/allatltude

Planetary motion

• Also used are zenith angle =angle from point directly overhead to point In quest/on =90 deg
minus elevation angle; and nadir angle = angle at the observer from the center of Earth to
point In quest/on =90 deg plus elevation angle.

where atan2 is the software function with output defined over 0 deg to 360 deg and the
asin function is evaluated over -90 deg to +90 deg.
Spherical geometry is distinctly different from plane geometry in several ways.
Most fundamental is that parallel lines do not exist in spherical geometry_This can be
seen by thinking of 2 meridians which are both perpendicular to the equator of a
coordinate system, but which ultimately meet at the pole. All pairs of great circles
either lie on top of each other or intersect at 2 points 180 deg apart
Another concept in spherical geometry that is different than plane geometry is
illustrated in Fig_ 5-6, in which we have constructed a spherical triangle using the
equator and two lines of longitude. The intersection of the longitude lines with the
equator are both right angles. such that the sum of the angles of the triangle exceed
180 deg by an amount equal to the angle at the pole. The sum of the angles of any
spherical triangle is always larger than 180 deg. The amount by which this sum
exceeds 180 deg is called the spherical excess and is directly proportional to the area
of the spherical triangle. Thus, small triangles on the sphere have a spherical excess
near zero, and are very similar to plane triangles. Large spherical triangles, however,
are very different as in Fig. 5-6 with 2 right angles.
A radian is the angle subtended if I take a string equal in length to the mdius of a
circle, and stretch it along the circumference_ Similarly, if I take an area equal to the
square of the mdius, and stretch it out on the surface of a sphere (which requires some
distortion, since the surface of the sphere cannot fit on a flat sheet), the resulting area
is called a steradian. Since the area of a sphere is 4w2, there are 411: stemdians in a full
sphere, and 211: stemdians in a hemisphere. These units are convenient for area problems, becl}use in any spherical triangle, the spherical exce8$, expressed in mdians, is
equal to the area of the triangle expressed in stemdians. In general, the area, A, of any
spherical polygon (a figure with sides which are great circle arcs) expressed in stemdians is given by:
A =1: - (n-2)1I:

(5-3)

where n is the number of sides, and 1: is the sum of the rotation angles expressed in
mdians.

Rg. 5-6.

The Sum of the Angles In a Spherical Triangle Is Always Greater than 180 deg•.
The amount by which the sum exceeds 180 deg Is called the spherical excess and Is
proportional to the triangle area.

Figure 5-7 shows a variety of spherical triangles. Note that all of the triangle sides
are great circle arcs. Figure 5-7A is a nearly plane triangle, for which the sum of the
angles is approximately 180 deg and plane geometry is a close approximation. Figure
5-7B is called a right spherical triangle because the angle at B is a right angle. Just as
plane right triangles have particularly simple relationships among the angles and sides,
right spherical triangles also have exceptionally simple relationships between the sides
and angles. These are expressed by Napier's rules which are written out in Appendix D. Right spherical triangles are common in mission geometry problems, and
provide simple, straightforward solutions for many problems associated with angular
measurements.
There is a second type of special and particularly simple spherical triangle shown
in Fig. 5-7C. Here, side A-B has an arc length of 90 deg. This is called a quadrantal
spherical triangle. An equally simple set of rules apply to the relationship among the
angles and sides in quadmntal spherical triangles. These are also summarized in
Appendix D. Between them, right and quadrantal spherical triangles provide solutions
to most problems encountered in mission analysis.
Figure 5-70 shows an obtuse isosceles triangle with two equal rotation angles
larger than 90 deg. Clearly, this cannot exist in plane geometry. A similar strange triangle for plane geometry is Fig. 5-7E which shows an equilateral right triangle in
which all three angles and all three sides are 90 deg. This triangle represents 118 of the
surface of the celestial sphere, and has an area of 0.511: steradians, which. can be seen
either by examination or from the spherical excess rule. Finally, Fig. 5-7F shows a
very large spherical triangle. Note that this triangle is remarkably similar in appearance to the small triangle in 5-7A. This is because the triangle can be thought of either
as a small triangle with three angles of approximately 60 deg, or as a very large one,
with three angles of approximately 120 deg. That is, the area between A, B, and C can .
be thought of either as the inside of a small triangle or as the outside of a large one
which covers all of the surface of the sphere except for the small area between A, B,
and C. In this large spherical triangle, the rules of spherical geometry still apply and
can be used in very convenient fashions as described further in Wertz [2001].

104

Space Mission Geometry

5.1

5.1

Introdnction to Geometry on the Celestial Sphere

SldeX

(deg)
1
10

A. Nearly Plane Triangle

B. Right Spherical Triangle

30
60
90
120
150
170

C. Quadrantal Spherical Triangle

Fig. 5-8.

E. EquIlateral RIght Triangle

F. Very Large Spherical Triangle

Rg.5-7. Types of Spherical Triangles. See text for discussion.

SldeY Angle A

(deg)
1.00
9.85
26.6
41
45

41
27
10

(deg)
45.01
45.86

52.02
69

90
111
128
134

Succession of Right Spherical Triangles with One 45 deg Rotation Angle. As
spherical triangles become larger, they become less and less slmHar to plane triangles.
In the plane geometry approximation y x and A 45 deg. On the sphere tan y =
sin xtan 45 deg and cos A cos x sin 45 deg.

=

D. Obtuse Isosceles Triangle

185

=

=

face and the Sun. We can use the latter either to calculate Sun interference or for
thermal analysis. In both cases, once we choose the correct coordinate system, we can
easily develop exact formulas using spherical techniques.
Example 1. Analyzing Eclipses for a Low-Earth Orbit

In plane geometry, we can make triangles larger or smaller and maintain the same
relative proportions. In spherical geometry, this is not the case. A spherical triangle is
uniquely specified by either 3 sides or 3 rotation angles. Additional details on elementary spherical geometry are in Appendix D, which includes references to several
standard bOoks.
Because spherical triangles approach plane triangles in the limit of small size and
because most analysts are much more familiar with plane geometry, they tend to use
plane geometry approximations even when it is entirely inappropriate. An example
would be a geometry problem dealing with the surface of the Earth as seen from
nearby space. Figme 5-8 shows the differences between plane geometry and spherical
geometry, using the example of a right spherical triangle with one 45-deg rotation
angle. Here both the length of the hypotenuse and the other rotation angle are a function of the size of the triangle. For a spacecraft in geosynchronous orbit, the apparent
~ radius is 8. deg and, from the figme, the differences between plane and spherIcal geometry will be of the order of 0.1 deg. If this amount does not matter for a
particular problem, then the plane geometry approximation is fine. Otherwise, we
should use spherical geometry. In low-Earth orbit, the angular radius of the Earth is
60 deg to 70 deg, so plane geometry techniques give not only incorrect numerical
answers but results which are conceptually wrong. Thus, we should avoid plane
geometry approximations for problems involving spacecraft in low-Earth orbits or
nearly any type of precision pointing.
We will illustrate computations on the celestial sphere with two examples-the
duration of eclipses in a circular low-Earth orbit, and the angle between any spacecraft

.1

The first example is a satellite in a circular low-Earth orbit at altitude H =1 000 kID
and inclination i = 32 deg. We wish to determine the eclipse fraction for any date and
also the maximum and minimum eclipses over a year. Figme 5-9 shows four different
views of the geometry of this problem. In Fig. 5-9A we have drawn the geometry in
the "normal" fashion, with a Cartesian coordinate system centered on the Earth and
vec~ to the spacecraft and to the direction of the Sun. Although we could apply this
coordinate representation to our problem, it gives us no particular insight Also, to use
this coordinate representation without further analysis, we would have to simulate
the orbit and do a large number of trials to sample various eclipse durations throughout
the year.
Figme 5-9B provides more information by plotting the system on the unit celestial
sphere centered on the spacecraft. It shows the celestial equator, the orbit plane and
the ecliptic, which i$ the path of the Sun over the year. The light dashed circles ~ the
outline of the disk of the Earth as seen by the spacecraft as the Earth's center moves
along the spacecraft orbit path. An eclipse will occur whenever the disk of the Earth
crosses in front of the Sun. The circle centered on the orbit pole is tangent to the disk
of the Earth throughout the orbit Any object within this circle can be seen at all times
and ~ not be eclipsed by the Earth. The ecliptic does not pass through this circle of
no eclipse. Consequently, for the illustrated orbit, eclipses will occur at all times of the
y~ with no eclipse-free season. That is, no time exists when an eclipse does not occur
durmg some part of the orbit (For the time being, we are ignoring the rotation of the
sate~te's or?it du~ to various ~bing forces; This orbit rotation may make the
DSSOCIatedantbmetic more complex; It does not change the basic argument) Although

106

Space Mission Geometry

5.1

5.1

Introduction to Geometry on the Celestial Sphere

107

orbit [see Eq. (7-7) for the orbit period]. As the Sun moves along the ecliptic throughout the year, it will move slowly up and down. on the globe plot. The angle of the Sun
above or below the orbit plane, Ps, goes from a maximum of 55 deg above the orbit
plane to 55 deg below the plane. (55 deg is the sum of the assumed inclination of
32 deg and the angle between the ecliptic and the Earth's equator of 23 deg). By
inspeCtion, the maximum eclipse occurs when the Sun is in the orbit plane. It covers
120 deg of azimuth or 35 min for this orbit. Again by inspection, we see that the
minimum eclipse occurs when the Sun is at the upper or lower limit of its range. It
covers approximately 60 deg of azimuth. Thus eclipse will occur on every orbit,
with a minimum eclipse duration of about half the maximum, or 17 min. However, we
can also see by inspection that eclipses near minimum duration will occur only when
the Sun is quite close to its extreme range limit. Most of the time, the eclipse duration
Will be close to the maximum. Consequently, if we wish to assume an average eclipse
for analysis purposes, we should take a value close to the maximum eclipse rather than
one midway between the maximum and minimum values.
The geometry of Fig. 5-9C allows us easily to compute the eclipse fraction for any
given Sun angle conditions. Specifically, Fig. 5-9D shows a quadrantal spherical
triangle (that is, having one side =90 deg) between the orbit pole, nadir, and the point
at which the Sun is on the Earth's horizon. Let p be the angular radius of the Earth, {Js
be the angle of the Sun above the orbit plane, and cP /2 be half of the rotation angle
corresponding to the eclipse duration. From the rules for quadrantal triangles (Appendix D) we find immediately that

an

A. isometric View

B. Spacecraft-centered Celesllal Sphere
(Inertial coordinates)

cos (CP 12) = cos pI sin f3s' = cos pI cos f3s

(5-4a)

The duration of the eclipse in a circular orbit, TE• is then
TE =P (CP /360 deg)

c. Spacecraft-centered CeJeStlaJ Sphere

D. EcUpse Geometry Computations

(Eartlweferenced)

Rg. 5-9.

AHernat/ve VIew of Satellite Geometry for a 1,1IOO-km, 32-deg IncOnation Orbit.

we have gained some additional insight from this figme, it would still be awkward to
compute the eclipse duration for any particular geometry.
Figme 5-9C illustrates the same geometry in a celestial coordinate system centered
on the spacecraft, in which the orbit plane is the equator and we hold the direction to
the Earth fixed along the +X-axis. In this coordinate frame the Earth's disk is the fixed
shaded circle. Because one axis is always facing the Earth, this coordinate frame
rotates once per orbit in inertial space about the orbit pole. Thus any objects approximately fixed in inertial space, such as the stars, Sun, or Moon, will appear to rotate
once per orbit about the orbit pole. The heavy, solid line shows a typical path of the
Sun in one orbit. Again, an eclipse will occur whenever the path of the Sun goes behind
the disk of the Earth. We now have enough insight to understand what is happening
throughout the year and to develop straightforward formulas for the eclipse fraction
under any conditions.
In anyone orbit, the Sun will move along a smaIl circle path and the duration of the
eclipse will be the fraction of the smaIl circle behind the disk of the Earth. For the orbit
illustrated, the eclipse covers 113 deg of azimuth. Thus, the eclipse will last for
113 deg/360 deg =32% of the orbit period or about 33 min for the 105 min, 1,000 km

(5-4b)

where P is the orbit period from Eq. (7-7).
For our example, p =60 deg, f3s has been chosen to be 25 deg, and, therefore,
0= 113 deg and TE = 33 min as expected. Eq. (5-4) provides the eclipse fraction for
any Sun geometry involving circular orbits and an approximate check for orbits which
are not precisely circular. By adjusting p appropriately, we can use the same equation
to determine the time the Sun will be a certain number of degrees above or below the
Earth's horizon. This example shows how we develop physical insight and simple
formulas by using global geometry to analyze mission geometry problems.

Example2. S.un Angle Geometry
We can extend the straightforward computations of the preceding example to
determine the angle of the Sun relative to any arbitrary face on the spacecraft as the
spacecraft goes around in its orbit. This helps us analyze thermal effects and assess
possible Sun interference in the fields of view of various instruments.
We assume the spacecraft is flying in a traditional orientation for Earth-referenced
spacecraft with one axis pointed toward nadir and a second axis toward the orbit pole.
The computational geometry is in Fig. 5-10, which is geometrically identical to
Fig. 5-9. In this coordinate system, fixed on the spacecraft, the normal to a given
spacecraft face is represented by a point, N, on the celestial sphere. N remains fixed in
spacecraft coordinates, as does the orientation of nadir and the orbit pole. The Sun
moves once per orbit along a small circle of radius f3s~ This radius remains essentially
fixed for a single orbit. ris the angle from N to the orbit pole. The rotation angle Mt '

Space Mission Geometry

188

5.1

is the azimuthal difference between the Sun and N.1t varies uniformly once per orbit
from 0 to 360 deg. If I is the incident energy on the face with area A, K is the solar
constant in the vicinity of the Earth =1,367 W/ffil, and fJ is the angle between the Sun
and the normal, N, to the face, then at any given moment when the Sun is shining on
the face:
1= AK cos fJ
(5-5)
and, from the law of cosines for sides,

cos fJ =cos r cos fJs' + sin r sin fJs' cos (Mz)

(5-6)

By inspection, the maximum and minimum angles between the Sun and N are:

fJII/Q% = fJs' + r

and

fJmin = 1fJs' - rl

(5-7)

and r are both constants for a given orbit and spacecraft face, whereas Mz
changes throughout the orbit.

fJs'

5.1

IntroductJon to Geometry on the Celestial Sphere

109

°

where Azo is the azimuth of nadir relative to N. For condition (B) we use a quadrantal
triangle with fJ =90 deg to determine
Azback

= ±arccos [-lI(tan rtanfJS)]

(5-10)

The problem now reduces to determining whether conditions (A) or (B) or both will
occur and the relative order of the azimuth limits.
As an example, consider Figs. 5-9 and 5-10, for which P = 60 deg, w =0.0010
md/sec, and fJs = 25 deg.We assume the spacecraft face has an area of 05 m2 with its
normal vector at an azimuth of -75 deg from nadir (Azo= 75 deg) and an elevation of
35 deg above the orbit plane (r= 55 deg). From Eqs. (5-8) and (5-9), the azimuth limits
are: Azlecl~ = 185 deg, Azuclipse = 1315 deg, Azlback =109.0 deg, and Azy,acIc =
251.0 deg. °l'herefore, the total energy input on the face F over one orbit is between the
azimuths of Azi =251.0 deg and Az:z =185 deg.
Example 3. Sow Radiation Intensity
We can continue to extend our example to look at the average solar radiation input, lav on
any spacecraft face over an orbit This is given by
go
(5-11)

where, as before, A is the area of the face and K = 1,367 W1m2 is the solar constant in the vicinity
of the Earth. F is the time average fraction of the surface area projected in the direction of the
Sun and must lie between 0 and 1. If the attitude of the spacecraft is inertially fixed. then the
angle, fJ, between the unit vector, S , in the direction of the Sun and the unit vector, ~ , normal
to the face remains constant over an orbit If there is no eclipse during a given orbit. then
F

Fig. 5-10.

Geometry for Computation of Sun Angle on an Arbitrary Spacecraft Face. N is
the unit vector or direction normal to the face. As the spacecraft moves in Its orbit, the
apparent position of the Sun moves along the dashed line and the arc length {J
between the Sun and the normal to the face undergoes a sinusoidal oscillation.

Equations (5-5) to (5-7) apply to either circular or elliptical orbits. If the orbit is
circular with period P and angular frequency w =21t1P, then Eqs. (5-5) and (5-6) can
be integrated directly to determine the total energy, E, incident on the face between
azimuths Azl and Az2:
EAzl toAz2

=(AK/w) [(~-~) cos r cos fJi
+ (sin Mz2 - sin Mzt ) sin r sin fJi 1

(5-8)

In Eq. (5-8), the 0 azimuth is in the direction of N, and the angles are in mdians. In a
full orbit the Sun will shine on the face except for two periods: (A) during eclipse and
(B) when fJ > 90 deg and, therefore, the Sun is on the ''back side" of the face. From
Eq. (5-4a) the conditions for eclipse are
(5-9)
Azeclipse Azo ± arc cos (cos pI sin fJi )

=

= ~ . S = cos P

(inertially fixed. no eclipse)

(5-12)

which gives the same result as using Eq. (5-5) directly.
For a 3-axis-stabilized, nadir-oriented spacecraft in a circular orbit, the angle Pwill oscillate
sinusoidally as illustrated previously in Fig. 5-10. The amount of sunlight on the face will depend on both Yo the angle from the orbit normal to ~ ,and on Ps. the angle from the orbit normal
to the Sun. If (y + Ps) 590 deg, then the face will always be in sunlight and, assuming no
eclipse:

F =cos Y cos fJs
If Iy -

(nadir fixed, full sunlight, no eclipse)

(5-13a)

PsI ~ 90 deg, then the surface will always be shaded and, of course:
F=O

(nadir fixed. continuous shade)

(5-13b)

If neither of the above conditions hold, then the face will be shaded part of the time and in
sunlight part of the time. In this case, we integrate the instantaneous fraction of the surface area
projected in the direction of the Sun by the instantaneous Mz. starting and ending when fJ. the
Sun angle, is 90 deg. Dividing by 2n gives the average F over one orbit

1 II.,
1 II.,
F= cosp d(Mz) = - J[cosycosfJS
2n
2n

J

-II.,

+sinysinPS cos(Mz>1d(Mz)

-II.,

= (~cos ycos fJi + sin (f190 sin ysin Ps) In
(nadir fixed. partial shade, no eclipse)

(5-13c)

where ~ is expressed in radians and
cos ~ = -11 (tan y tan Pi>

(5-14)

110

Space Mission Geometry

5.2

The quantity <1>00 is the value of Mz at which P= 90 deg, i.e., when the transition occurs
between shade and sunlight
Consider our previous example for which Ps' = 65 deg and Y= 55 deg. In this case,
Eq. (5-13c) is applicable and, from Eq. (5-14), d>oo = 109.1 deg. This means that the Sun will
shine on the face in question whenever the azimuth of the Sun is within 109.1 deg of the azimuth
of the face. From Eq. (5-13c), F = 0.370. This means that, without eclipses, the average sol8r
input on the face is 37.0% of what it would be if the Sun were continuously shining normaI to
the face. If the face in question has a surface area of 0.5 m2, then the average solar input over an
orbit with full sunlight is (0.5) (1 ;367) (0.370) = 253 W.
)
The nadir-oriented satellite above is spinning at one rotation per orbit in inertial space. Thus,
all of the above formulas can be applied to spinning spacecraft with the interpretation that I
is the average solar radiation input over one spin period, yis the angle from the spin axis to ~
face in question, and Ps'is the angle from the spin axis to the Sun.
In practice there are two principal corrections to the above formulas:

5.2

Earth Geometry Viewed from Space

111

To begin. we determine p, the angular radius of the spherical Earth as seen from the
spacecraft, and A.o, the angular radius measured at the center of the Earth of the region
seen by the spacecraft (see Fig. 5-11). Because we have assumed a spherical Earth, the
line from the spacecraft to the Earth's horizon is perpendicular to the Earth's radius,
and therefore
sinp=cosA.o = ~

(5-16)

p+ Au = 90 deg

(5-17)

~+H

and
where RE is the radius of the Earth and H is the altitude of the satellite.

• F is reduced by eclipses
• The effective F is increased by reflected or emitted radiation from the Earth
For either an inertially fixed spacecraft or a spinning spacecraft, the effect of ecliPses is simply to reduce F by the fraction of the orbit over which the spacecraft is in eclipse:
F= Po (1- iP1360 deg)

(5-1S)

where Po is the noneclipse value of F determin~ from Eqs. (5-12) or (5-13) and iPis the eclipse
fraction from Eq. (5-4).
For Earth-oriented spacecraft the situation is more complex, because the solar input depends
on the orientation of the Sun relative to both the Earth and spacecraft face being evaluated. Let
11 be the angular distance from ~ to nadir and p be the angular radius of the Earth. If the face in
question is sufficiently near zenith (opposite the direction to the center of the Earth) that 11- p
~ 90 deg, then F = Po and F will not be reduced by eclipses. For this condition, any eclipses
which occur will happen when the face is shaded. Alternatively, consider what happens when
Iy- Ps'l =90 deg.In this case, there is only a smaIl portion of the orbit when the Sun shines on
the face. Let iP be the eclipse fraction from Eq. (5-4) and iP90 the azimuth definet\ above at
which the transition from sunlight to shade occurs. If iPl2 ~ the larger of IAzN ± iP90l, then the
spacecraft will be in eclipse when the Sun is in a position to shine on the face. In this case F will
be reduced to O. For conditions in between these two extremes, F will be between 0 and its noneclipse value. Specific values will need to be evaluated numerically using Eqs. (5-4) and (5-8).
The heat input from both reflected and emitted radiation from the Earth increases the effective
value of F. It is significantly more complex to compute than the effect of eclipses because of the
extended size of the disk of the Earth and the variability in the intensity of reflected radiation.
However, reasonable upper limits for radiation from the Earth are:
• 475 W/m2 for reflected solar radiation (albedo)
• 260 W/m2 for emitted IR radiation (thermal radiatian)
Section 11.5 provides additional details on how to compute thermal inputs to the spacecraft.

5.2 Earth Geometry Viewed from Space
The most common problem in space mission geometry is to determine the relative
geometry of objects on the Earth's surface as seen from the spacecraft. One example
is to use the given coordinates of a target on the Earth to determine its coordinates in
the spacecraft field of view. Another is to determine the intercept point on the surface
of the Earth corresponding to a given direction in spacecraft coordinates.

Fig. 5-11.

Relationship Between Geometry as VJewed from the Spacecraft and from the
Center of the Earth. See also Ag. 5-12.

Thus, the Earth forms a small circle of radius p on the spacecraft sky, and the
spacecraft sees the area within a small circle of radius A.o on the surface of the Earth.
The distance, DmiU' to the horizon is given by (see Fig. 5-13 below):
(5-18)
The spherical-Earth approximation is adequate for most mission geometry applications. However, for precise work, we must apply a correction for oblateness. as
explained in detail by Liu [1978] or Collins [1992]. The Earth's oblateness has two
distinct effects on the shape of the Earth as seen from space. First, the Earth appears
somewhat oblate rather than round, and second, the center of the visible oblate Earth
is displaced from the true geometric center of the Earth. For all remaining computations in this section, we will use splierical coordinates both on the Earth and in the
spacecraft frame. Computationally, we can treat oblateness and surface irregularities
as simply the target's altitude above or below a purely spherical Earth. That the Earth's
real surface is both irregular and oblate is immaterial to the computation, and, therefore, the results are exact

112

Space Mission Geometry

5.2

We wish to find the angular relationships between a target, P, on the surface of the
Earth, and·a spacecraft with subsatellite point, SSP, also on the surface of the Earth, as
shown in Fig. 5-12. We assume that the subsateUite point's latitude, Latssp and longitude, Longssp, are known. Depending on the application, we wish to solve one of two
problems: (1) given the coordinates of a target on the Earth, find its coordinates vieWed
by the spacecraft, or (2) given the coordinates of a direction relative to the spacecraft,
find the coordinates of the intercept on the surface of the Earth. In both cases, we determine the relative angles between SSP and P on the Earth's surface and then transform these angles into spacecraft coordinates.
Given the coordinates of the subsatellite point (Longssp, Latssp ) and target
(Longp, Latp ), and defining IlL = 1Longssp- Longp I, we wish to find the azimuth,
(JJE' measured eastward from north, and angular distance, .it, from the subsateUite point
to the target (See Fig. 5-12.) These are given by

cos.it=sinLatsspsinLatp+cosLatsspcosLatp cos IlL (.it < IS0deg)

(5-19)

cos (JJE = (sin Latp - cos II. sin Latssp )/ (sin II. cos Latssp )

(5-20)

Earth Geometry Viewed from Space

113

True Outer Horizon

J~________________ I~mmm

FIg. 5-13.

Definition of Angular Relationships Between Satellite, Target, and Earth Center.

where (JJE < ISO deg if P is east of SSP and (JJE > ISO deg if ~ is west of SSP.
Generally, then, the only problem is to find the relationship between the nadir
angle, 11, measured at the spacecraft from the subsateUite point (= nadir) to the target;
the Earth central angle, A., measured at the center of the Earth from the subsateUite
point to the target; and the grazing angle or spacecraft elevation angle, e, measured at
the target between the spacecraft and the local horizontal. Figure 5-13 defines these
angles and related distances. First, we find the angular radius of the Earth, p, from
sinp = cos A.o =

~
RE+H

(~-24)

which is the same as Eq. (5-16). Next, if A. is known. we find 11 from
tan 11 = sinpsinA.
I-sinpcoSA.

(5-25)

If 11 is known, we fmd E from
Fig. 5-12.

Relationship Between Target and SubsateliHe Point on the Earth's Surface.

Alternatively, given the position of the subsateIIite point (Longssp, Latssp) and the
position of the target relative to this point «(JJE,II.), we want to determine the geographic coordinates of the target (Longp, Latp ):
cos Lat; = cos.it sin LatSSP + sin II. cos Latssp cos (JJE (Lat; < ISO deg) (5-21)
cosllL = (coSA.-sinLatssp sinLatp)/(cosLatsspcosLatp)
where Latp =90 deg (JJE

> ISO deg.

(5-22)

Latp andP is east of SSP if(JJE < ISO deg and west of SSP if

We now wish to transform the coordinates on the Earth' s surface to coordinates as
seen from the spacecraft. By symmetry, the azimuth of the target relative to north is
the same as viewed from either the spacecraft or the Earth. That is,

'% spc = '% surface = (JJE

(5-23)

cos E= sin11
sinp

(5-26a)

Or, if E is known, we find 11 from

sin 11 = cos E sin P

(5-26b)

Finally, the remaining angle and side are obtained from
11+A.+E=90deg

(5-27)

D = RE (sin .it/sin 11)

(5-2S)

Figure 5-14 summarizes the process of transforming between spacecraft coordinates
and Earth coordinates.
As an example, consider a satellite at an altitude of 1,000 km. From Eq. (5-16), the
angular radius of the Earth p= 59.S deg. From Eqs. (5-17) and (5-1S), the horizon is
30.2 deg in Earth central angle from the subsateUite point and is at a line-of-sight

Space Mission Geometry

114

5.2

Earth Geometry Viewed from Space

5.2

Rrsi, compute the anguJar radius of Earth, P
slnp = COSAo = RE/(RE

115

B.

+ H)

(5-24)

To compute spacecraft viewing angles given the subsateilite point at (Longssp, Latssp) and
target at (Longp, Latp), and !1L e , Longssp - Longp'
cos A. = sin Latssp sIn Latp + cos Latssp cos Latp cos!1L (A < 180 deg)

(5-19)

cos cJ>E= (sin Latp- cos A sin Latssp) / (sin A cos Latssp)

(5-20)

tan 7J=slnpsInA/(1-sInPCOSA)

(5-25)

To compute coordinates on the Earth given the subsatellite point at (Longssp, Latssp)
and target direction (cJ>6 71):
cos E = sin 7J/sln P

(5-268)

A=90deg-7J-E
cos Latp' = cos A sin Latssp+sln A cos Latsspcos cJ>E

(5-27)

(Latp' < 180 deg)

cos !:1L= (cos A-sIn Latsspsln Latp)/(cosLatssp cosLatp)
FIg. 5-14.

(5-21)
(5-22)

Summary of the Process of Transforming Between Spacecraft VJewlng Angles
and Earth Coordinates. Equation numbers are listed In the figure and variables are
as defined In Rgs. 5-11 and 5-12.

distance of 3,709 km from the satellite. We will assume a ground station at Hawaii
(Latp = 22 deg, Longp = 200 deg) and a subsateUite point at Latssp = 10 deg, Longssp
= 185 deg. From Eqs. (5-19) and (5-20), the ground station is a distance A= 18.7 deg
from the subsateUite point, and has an azimuth relative to north = 48.3 deg. Using Eqs.
(5-25) and (5-28) to transform into spacecraft coordinates, we find that from the spacecraft the target is 56.8 deg up from nadir (7J) at a line of sight distance, D, of 2,444 km.
From Eq. (5-27), the elevation of the spacecraft as seen from the ground station is 145
deg. The substantial foreshortening at the horizon can be seen in that at E = 14.5 deg
we are nearly half way from the horizon to the subsateUite point (A = 18.7 deg vs. 30.2
deg at the horizon).
Using these equations, we can construct Fig. 5-15, which shows the Earth as seen
from 1,000 km over Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula in the Gulf of Mexico. The left side
shows the geometry as seen on the surface of the Earth. The right side shows the
geometry as seen by the spacecraft projected onto the spacecraft-centered celestial
sphere. As computed above, the maximum Earth central angle will be approximately
30 deg from this altitude such that the spacecraft can see from northwestern South
America to Maine on the East Coast of the U.S. and Los Angeles on the West Coast.
The angular radius of the Earth as seen from the spacecraft will be 90 - 30 =60 deg as
shown in Fig. 5-15B. Because the spacecraft is over 20 North latitude, the direction to
nadir in spacecraft coordinates will be 20 deg south of the celestial equator. (The
direction from the spacecraft to the Earth's center is exactly opposite the direction
from the Earth's center to the spacecraft.)
Even after staring at it a bit, the view from the spacecraft in Fig. 5-15B looks
strange. First, recall that we are looking at the spacecraft-centered celestial sphere
from the outside. The spacecraft is at the center of the sphere. Therefore, the view for
us is reversed from right-to-Ieft as seen by the spacecraft so that the Atlantic is on the
left and the Pacific on the right Nonetheless, there still appear to be distortions in the
view. Mexico has an odd shape and South America has almost disappeared. All of this

A. GaometJy on the Earth's Surface

(SSP--Subsalellit8 PoInt)
B. GaometJy Seen on the Spacecraft Cantered
Celestial Sphere
A'. RegIon on the Earth Seen by the 35 mm
Camara Frame Shown In (8')

B'. ReId of VIew of a 35 mm Camara with a
Normal Lens looking Along the East Coast

of the us.
Bn. Enlargement of the 35 mm Frame ShowIng
the RegIon from Georgla to MassachussIIs.

Rg. 5-15.

VJewlng Geometry for a Satellite at 1,000 km over the Yucatan Peninsula at
90 deg W longitude and 20 deg N latitude. See text for discussion. [Copyright by
Microcosm; reproduced by permissIon.)

is due to the very strong foreshortening at the edge of the Earth's disk. Notice for
example that Jacksonville, FL, is about halfway from the subsateUite point to the
horizon. This means that only 1I4th of the area seen by the spacecraft is closer to the
subsatellite point than Jacksonville. Nonetheless. as seen from the perspective of the
spacecraft, Jacksonville is 54 deg from nadir, i.e., 90% of the way to the horizon with
3/4ths of the visible area beyond it

Space Mission Geometry

116

5,2

The rectangle in the upper left of Fig. 5-15B is the field of view of a 35 mm camera
with a 50 mm focal length lens (a normal lens that is neither wide angle nor telephoto).
The cameraperson on our spacecraft has photographed Florida and the eastern seaboard of the US to approximately Maine The region seen on the Earth is shown in Fig.
5-15X and 5-15B' and an enlargement of a portion of the photo from Georgia to
Maine is shown in Fig. 5-15B'~ Note the dramatic foreshortening as Long Island and
Cape Cod become little more than horizontal lines, even though they are some distance
from the horizon. This distortion does not come from the plotting style, but is what the
spacecraft sees. We see the same effect standing on a hilltop or a mountain. (In a sense,
the spacecraft is simply a very tall mountain.) Most of our angular field of view is
taken up by the field or mountain top we are standing on. For our satellite, most of
what i~ seen is the Yucatan and Gulf of Mexico directly below. There is lots of real
estate at the horizon, but it appears very compressed. From the spacecraft, I can point
an antenna at Long Island, but I can not map it We must keep this picture in mind
whenever we assess a spacecraft's fields of view or measurement needs.
Thus far we have considered spacecraft geometry oilly from the point of view of a
spacecraft fixed over one point on the Earth. In fact, of course, the spacecraft is traveling at high velocity. Figure 5-16A shows the path of the subsatellite point over the
Earth's surface, called the satellite's ground trace or ground track. Locally, the ground
trace is very nearly the arc of a great circle. However, because of the Earth's rotation,
the spacecraft moves over the Earth's surface in a spiral pattern with a displacement
at successive equator crossings directly proportional to the orbit period. For a satellite
in a circular orbit at inclination i, the subsatellite latitude, 8a, and longitude, La, relative
to the ascending node are
sin 8s = sin i sin (0) t)
(5-29)
tan (Ls + WEt) = cos i tan (w t)

(5-30)

where t is the time since the satellite crossed the equator northbound,
WE = 0.004 178 07 deg/s is the rotational velocity of the Earth on its axis, and 0) is the
satellite's angular velocity. For a satellite in a circular orbit, win deg/s is related to the
period, P, in minutes by

w = 61 P

~

0.071 deg/s

(5-31)

Apparent Motion of Satellites for an Observer on the Earth

5.3

A. Satellite Ground Track.

Fig. 5-16.

117

B. Swath Coverage for Satellite Ground Track
In (A), for Several GrazIng Angles, E.

Path of a Satellite Over the Earth's Surface. A swath which goes from horizon to
horizon will cover a very large area, although we will see most of this area at very
shallow elevation angles near the horizon.

where A 14 is the effective outer horizon, Aw.n.er is the inner horizon, the area on the
Earth's :urface is in steradians, and P is the orbital period of the satellite. The plus sign
applies to horizons on opposite sides of the ground trace and .the minus si~ to both
horizons on one side, that is, when the spacecraft looks exclUSIvely left or nght For a
swath of width 2A symmetric about the ground trace, this reduces to
ACR = (4nl P) sin A

(5-34)

Alternatively, this can be expressed in terms of the limiting grazing angle (or elevation
angle), E, and angular radius of the Earth, p, as
(5-35)
ACR =(4n1P) cos (E+ arc sin (cos Esin p»
Because the curvature of the Earth's surface strongly affects the ACR, Eqs. (5-33)
to (5-35) are not equal to the length of the arc between the effective horizons times
either the velocity of the spac,ecraft or the velocity of the subsatellite point.

where 0.071 deg/s is the maximum angular velocity of a spacecraft in a circular orbit
Similarly, the ground track velocity, Yg, is

Yg

= 2n REIP S 7.905 kmls

(5-32)

where RE =6,378 km is the equatorial radius of the Earth. For additional information
on the satellite ground trace and coverage, taking into account the rotation of the Earth,
see Chap. 8 of Wertz [2001].
Fig. 5-16B shows the swath coverage for a satellite in low-Earth orbit The swath
is the area on the surface of the Earth around the ground trace that the satellite can
observe as it passes overhead. From the fonnulas for stationary geometry in
Eqs. (5-24) to (5-27), we can compute the width of the swath in tenns of the Earth
central angle, A.. Neglecting the Earth's rotation, the area coverage rate, ACR, of a
spacecraft will be
ACR =2n (sin Aouter ± sin Aw.n.er)1 P

(5-33)

5.3 Apparent Motion of Satellites for an Observer on the Earth
Even for satellites in perfectly circular orbits, the apparent motion of a satellite
across the sky for an observer on the Earth's surface is not a simple geometrical figure.
If the observer is in the orbit plane, then the apparent path of the satellite will be a great
circle going directly overhead. If the observer is somewhat outside of the orbit plane,
then the instantaneous orbit will be a large circle in three-dimensional space viewed
from somewhat outside the plane of the circle and projected onto the observer's celestial sphere.
Because the apparent satellite path is not a simple geometrical figure, it is best
computed using a simulation program. Available commercial programs include
Satellite Tool Kit (1990), Orbit View and Orbit Workbench (1991), Orbit II Plus
(1991), and MicroGWBE (1990), which generated the figures in this chapter..These
programs also work with elliptical orbits, so they are convenient-along WIth the

118

Space Mission Geometry

5.3

appropriate formulas from this chapter-for evaluating specific orbit geometry.
Unfortunately, a simulation does not provide the desired physical insight into the
apparent motion of satellites. Neither does it provide a rapid method of evaluating
geometry in a general case, as is most appropriate when first designing a mission. For
these problems, we are interested in either bounding or approximating the apparent
motion of satellites rather than in computing it precisely. After all, the details of a
particular pass will depend greatly on the individual geometrical conditions. Approximate analytic formulas are provided by Wertz [1981,2001]. For mission design, the
circular orbit formulas provided below for satellites in low-Earth orbit and geosynchronous orbit work well.

5.3.1 Satemtes in Circular Low-Earth Orbit
We assume a satellite is in a circular low-Earth orbit passing near a target-or ground
station. We also assume that the orbit is low enough that we can ignore the Earth's
rotation in the relatively brief period for which the satellite passes overhead." We wish
to determine the characteristics of the apparent satellite motion as seen from the
ground station. Throughout this section we use the notation adopted in Sec. 52.
Figure 5-17 shows the geometry. The small circle centered on the ground station
represents the subsatellite points at which the spacecraft elevation, E, seen by the
ground station is greater than some minimum Emin. The nature of the communication
or observation will determine the value of Emin. For communications, the satellite
typically must be more than 5 deg above the horizon, so Emin >= 5 deg. The size of this
circle of accessibility strongly depends on the value of Emin, as emphasized in the discussion of Fig. 5-15. In Fig. 5-17 we have assumed a satellite altitude of 1,000 km. The
dashed circle surrounding the ground station is at Emin 0 deg (that is, the satellite's
true outer horizon), and the solid circle represents Emm 5 deg. In practice we typically
select a specific value of Emin and use that number. However, you should remain aware
that many of the computed parameters are extremely sensitive to this value.

=
=

5.3

Apparent Motion of Satellites for an Observer on the Earth

119.

Given a value of s",in' we can define the maximum Earth central angle, AmID" the
maximum nadir angle, l1max> measured at the satellite from nadir to the ground station,
and the maximum range, Dmax> at which the satellite will still be in view. These
parameters as determined by applying Eqs. (5-26a) to (5-28) are given by:
sin l1max = sin p cos smin

ilmax

= 90 deg -

smin -l1max

D = R sin il max
max
E sinn
',max

(5-36)

(5-37)
(5-38)

where p is the angular radius of the Earth as seen from the satellite, that is, sin p =
RE/(RE+ H). We call the smail circle of radius Amax centered on the target the effective
horizon, corresponding in our example to s",in 5 deg, to distinguish it f!om t~e t,"!,e
or geometrical horizon for which smin = 0 deg. Whenever .the subsatelhte ~mt .lIes
within the effective horizon around the target or ground station, then communications
or observations are possible. The duration, T, of this contact and the maximum elevation angle, s",ax' of the satellite depends on how close the ground station is to the
satel{ite's ground track on any given orbit pass.
As described in Chap. 6, the plane of a spacecraft's orbit and, therefore, the ground
track, is normally defined by the inclination, i, and either the right ascension, n, or
longitude, Lnode' of the ascending node. Except for orbit perturbations, n, which is
defined relative to the stars, remains fixed in inertial space while the Earth rotates
under the orbit On the other hand, Lnodeis defined relative to the Earth's surface and,
therefore, increases by 360 deg in 1,436 min, which is the rotation p::riod of the Earth
relative to the stars. (Again, orbit perturbations affect the exact rotation rate.) Because
of this orbit rotation relative to the Earth, it is convenient to speak of the instantaneous
ascending node which is Lnode evaluated at the time of an observation or passage over
a ground station. For purposes of geometry it is also o~en appropriat~ to work in terms
of the instantaneous orbit pole, or the pole of the OrbIt plane at the time of the observation. The coordinates of this pole are
latpo/e= 9Odeg-i
(5-39)

=

longpo/e = Lnode-90 deg

(5-40)

A satellite passes directly over a target or ground station (identified by the subscript

gs) on the Earth's surface ifand only if
sin (longgs-Lnode) = tan latgsl tan i

(5-41)

There are two valid solutions to the above equation corresponding to the satellite passing over the ground station on the northbound leg of the orbit or on the southbound
leg. To determine when after crossing the equator the satellite passes ov~r the ground
station for a circular orbit, we can determine J.l, the arc length along the InstantaneoUS
ground track from the ascending node to the ground station, from
sin Jl = sin latgsl sin i
FIg. 5-17.

Geometry of Satellite Ground Track Relative to an Observer on the Earth's
Surface.

• See Chap. 9 of Wertz [2001] for a more accurate approximation which takes the Earth's rotation into account.

(5-42)

Again, the two valid solutions correspond to the northbound and southbound passes.
Figure 5-17 defines the parameters of the satellite's pass overhead in terms oU min,
the minimum Earth central angle between the satellite's ground track and the ground
station. This is 90 deg minus the angular distance measured at the center of the Earth

120

Space Mission Geometry

5.3

from the ~und station t~ the instantan~us orbit pole at the time of contact If We
know th.e latitude and longttude of the orbit pole and ground station, gs, then the value
of A.milllS
sin A.",in = sin/atpole sin latgs + cos latpole cos latgs cos (Mong)

(5-43)

where tJong is the longitude difference between gs and the orbit pole. At the point of
closest approach, ~e.can compute the minimum nadir angle, Timi", maximum elevation
angle, Bmax, and mlDlMum range, D min as
tan?'J .

'Imlll

=I

sinpsinA.
.

-SIDPCOSA.min

s",ax = 90 deg - A.",in - Timin
Dmill
. =RE (sinA.min)
~

SIDTfmin

(5-44)

(5-45)
(5-46)

Dmin

PDmin

(5-47)

whe~e Vsat ~s ~e orbita.1 velocity of the satellite, and P is the orbit period.
Fmally, It IS convement to compute the total azimuth range, L1~, which the satellite
covers as seen by the ground station, the total time in view T. and the azimuth J.
. . arc at wh·Ich the elevation
.angle
' ~IS a maximum: , 'I'centero
at the center 0 f the vlewlDg

cos~~
2

(5-48)

P)
- arc cos (COSA. J
(-I80deg

T=

max
COSA.
min

(5-49)

where the arc cos is in degrees. I/Jcenter is related to I/J l the azimuth to the direction
to the projection of the orbit pole onto the ground byp () e>

"center = ] 80 deg -I/Jpole
cos ~le =(sin latpole-sin A.",in sin latgs) I (cos A.wn cos latgs )

TABLE 5-4. Summary of Computations for Ground StatIon Pass Parameters. We assume
the following parameters: orbit pole at latpols 61.5 deg, longpolB 100 deg; Hawaii
ground station at latgs 22 deg, longgs 200 deg; minimum allowable elevation
angle EmIn = 5 deg. The result Is a typIcal pass tlme-In-view of about 12 min.

=

=

=

=

Eq.

Parameter

Formula

No.

Example

5-16 p = 59.8deg

Period, P

P = 1.658 669 x 1()-4 x (6,378.14 + H)312

7·7

Max Nadir Angle, Tlmax

sin Tlmax = sin p cos Emln

5-36 Tlmax = 59.4 deg

Max Earth
Central Angle, .1max

Amax

5-37 Amax = 25.6 deg

Max Distance, Dmax

DIIUIX = RE (sin Amax I sin l1max)

5-38 Dmax= 3,202 km

sin Amln = sin latpo/e sIn latgs
+ cos latpale cos latgs cos (Along)

5-43 AmIn = 14.7 deg

tan Tlmln = (sin p sin AmIn) 1(1 - sin p cos

5-44 TlmIn = 53.2 deg

Min Earth
Central Angle, AmIn
Min Nadir Angle, TlmIn

= 90 deg - Emln - Tlmax

P= 105 min

Amln)

Max Bevatlon
Angle, Emax

Emax = 90 deg - AmIn - TlmIn

5-45 Emax = 22.1 deg

Min Distance, Dmfn

DmIn = RE (sin AmIn I sin Tlmln)

5-46 Dmfn = 2,021 km

Max Angular Rate, 8max

8max = [(211: (RE + H)) I (P DmW

5-47

Azimuth Range, M

cos (A1'!/2) = (tan AminI tan ilmax>

TIme In View, T

T = (P 1180 deg) cos-1 (cos Amaxl cos AmlrJ 5-49

8max

= 12.6
deg/mln

5-46 AI'! = 113.6 deg

T= 12.36 min

(5-50)

5.3.2 Satellites in Geosynchronous Orbit and Above

(5-51)

An important special case of the satellite motion as seen from the Earth's surface
occurs for geostationary satellites, which hover approximately over one location on
the Earth's equator. This will occur at an altitude of 35,786 km, for which the satellite
period is 1,436 min. equaling the Earth's sidereal rotation period relative to the fixed
stars. Chapter 6 describes the long-term drift of geostationary satellites. We describe
here the apparent daily motion of these satellites as seen by an observer on the Earth.
For convenience, we assume the observer is at the center of the Earth and compute
the apparent motion from there. The detailed motion seen from a lOcation on the
Earth's surface will be much more complex because the observer is displaced relative
to the Earth's center. (See Wertz [2001].) But the general results will be the same, and
the variations can be computed for any particular location.

~here ~l!le < I~O deg if the orbit pole is ~t of the ground station and tPpole> 180 deg
If the orlnt pole IS west of the ground station. The maximum time in view T.
occurs
When the sateI]'Ite passes overhead and A.",in = O. Eq. (5-49) then reduces' to:ma.T'
Tmax = P (A.",a;c /180 deg)

121

Table 5-4 summarizes the computations for ground station coverage and provides
a worked example. Note that as indicated above, T is particularly sensitive to Emin. If,
for example, .we assume a mountain-top ground station with Emin = 2 deg, then the time
in view increases by 15% to 14.27 min. FigtIre 5-18 shows samples of several ground
tracks for satellites in a 1,000 Ian orbit

Earth Angular Radius, p slnp=RE/(RE+H)

. At the point of close~ approach, the satellite is moving perpendicular to the line of
sight to the ground stati,?n. Thus, the maximum angular rate of the satellite as seen
from the ground station,Omax' will be

9max = ~at = 2n(RE + H)

Apparent Motion of Satellites for an Observer on the Earth

5.3

(5-52)

If satellite passes are approximately evenly distributed in off-ground track angle then
the average pass duration is about 80% of Tmax and 86% or more of the passes ~Il be
longer than half Tmar

Space Mission Geometry

122

5.3

5.4

Development of Mapping and Pointing Budgets

123

T

1~
2w-11- 0.03 deg
HorizoA
A. Geometry on the Globe

Fig. 5-18.

MoUon of a SatellHe at 1,000 Ion as Seen on the Earth
the Surface of the Earth. See text for formulas.

and by an Observer on

Orbit inclination and eccentricity are the principal causes of the apparent daily
motion of a geosynchronous satellite. These two effects yield different-shaped apparent orbits, which can cause confusion if the source of the apparent motion is not cIeiuiy
identified. As Fig. 5-19A shows, the inclination of the orbit produces a figure eight
centered on the equator, as seen by an observer at the Earth's center. The half-height,
h inc• and half-width, wine> of the figure eight due to an inclination, i, are given by .
hinc = ±i
tanwinc

A. i=2deg
e=O

B. Geometry on the
Ground-Statlon-Centered CelesUaI Sphere

=~(~seci -~COSi)=tan2(il2)

(5-53)
(5-54)

where the approximation in the second formula applies to small i. The source of this
figure eight or analemma is the motion of the satellite along its inclined orbit, which
will alternately fall behind and t,hen catch up to the uniform rotation of the Earth on
its axis.
• The second factor which causes a nonuniform apparent motion is a nonzero eccentricity of the satellite orbit An eccentricity, e; causes an East-West oscillation, WeeI:' of
magnitude
):3607tdeg) e= ±(
+ 115 deg)e

wecc = \.

(5-55)

In general, the inclination and eccentricity motions are superimposed, resulting in
two possible shapes for the motion of the geosynchronous satellite as seen from the
Earth. If the nonzero inclination effect dominates, then the satellite appears to move in
a figure eight If the eccentricity effect is larger than the inclination effect, then the
apparent motion is a single open oval, as shown in Fig. 5-19B..
For satellites above geosynchronous orbit, the rotation of the Earth on its axis
dominates the apparent motion of the satellite. Consequently, it is most convenient in
this case to plot the motion of the satellite relative to the background of the fixed stars.

Fig. 5-19.

B. 1=2deg
e=O.OOl

Apparent Dally Motion of a Satellite In Geosynchronous Orbit.

In this coordinate frame, we can handle the motion relative to the fixed inertial background just the same as we do the apparent motion of the Moon or planets. Many
introductory texts on celestial mechanics treat this issue. See, for example, Roy
[1991], Green [1985], or Smart [1977], or Wertz [2001].

5.4 Development of Mapping and Pointjng Budgets
Nearly all spacecraft missions involve sensing or interaction with the world around.
them, so a spacecraft needs to know or control its orientation. We may conveniently
divide this problem of orientation into two .areas of pointing and mapping. Pointing
means orienting the spacecraft, camera. sensor, or antenna to a target having a specific
geographic position or inertial direction. Mapping is determining the geographic
position of the look point of a camera. sensor, or antenna. Satellites used only for
communications will generally require only pointing. Satellites having some type of
viewing instrument, such as weather, ground surveillance, or Earth resources satellites, will ordinarily require both pointing ("point the instrument at New Yorlc'') and
mapping ("determine the geographic location of the tall building in pixel 2073'').
The goal of this section is to develop budgets for pointing and mapping. A budget
lists all the sources of pointing and mapping errors and how much they contribute to
the overall pointing and mapping accuracy. This accuracy budget frequently drives
both the cost and performance of a space mission. If components in the budget are left
. out or incorrectly assessed, the satellite may not be able to meet its performance
objectives. More commonly, people who define the system requirements make the
budgets for pointing and mapping too stringent and, therefore, unnecessarily drive
up the cost of the mission. As a result, we must understand from the start the components of mapping and pointing budgets and how they affect overall accuracy. In this
section we will emphasize Earth-oriented missions. but the same basic rules apply to
inertially-oriented missions.
The components of the pointing and mapping budgets are shown in Fig. 5-20 and
defined in Table 5-5. BaSic pointing and mapping errors are associated with spacecraft
navigation-that is, knowledge of itS position and attitude in space. But even if the

124

Space Mission Geometry

5.4

position and attitude are known precisely, a number of other errors will be present For
example, an error in the observation time will result in an error in the computed location of the target, because the target frame of reference moves relative to the
spacecraft. A target fixed on the Earth's equator will rotate with the Earth at 464 mls.
A IO-sec error in the observation time would produce an error of 5 kIn in the computed
geographic location of the target. Errors in the target altitude, discussed below, can be
a key component of pointing and mapping budgets. The instrument-mounting error
represents the misalignment between the pointed antenna or instrument and the sensor
or sensorS used to determine the attitude. This error is extremely difficult to remove.
Because we cannot determine it from the attitude data alone, we must view it as a critical parameter and keep it small while integrating the spacecraft.

Development of Mapping and Pointing Budgets

5.4

125

TABLE 5-5. Sources of Pointing and Mapping Errors.

SPACECRAFT POSITION ERRORS:
AI

In- or along-track

!I.e

Cross-track

Displacement normal to the spacecraft's orbit plane

Radial

Displacement toward the center of the Earth (nadir)

ARs

Displacement along the spacecraft's veloclty vector

SENSING AXIS ORIENTAnON ERRORS (In polar coordinates about nadir):
!I.Tf

Elevation

Error in angle from nadir to sensing axis

M

AzImuth

Error in rotation of the sensing axis about nadir

Sensing axis orientation errors include errors in (1) attitude determination, (2) instrument
mounting, and (3) stability for mapping or control for pointing.
OTHER ERRORS:
!I.RT
!I. T

Fig. 5-20.

DefInition of Pointing and Mapping Error Components.

Pointing errors differ from mapping errors in the way they include inaccuracies in
attitude control and angular motion. Specifically, the pointing error must include the
entire control error for the spacecraft. On the other hand, the only control-related
component of the mapping error is the angular motion during the exposure or
observation time. This short-term jitter results in a blurring of the look point of the
instrument or antenna.
As discussed earlier in Sec. 4.2.2, we may achieve an accuracy goal for either pointing or mapping in many ways. We may, in one instance, know the position of the
spacecraft precisely and the attitude only poorly. Or we may choose to allow a larger
error in position and make the requirements for determining the attitude more stringent In an ideal world we would look at all components of the pointing and mapping
budgets and adjust them until a small increment of accuracy costs the same for each
component For example, assume that a given mission requires a pointing accuracy of
20 milliradians; and that we tentatively assign 10 milliradians to attitude determination
and 5 milliradians to position determination. We also find more accurate attitude
would cost $100,000 per milliradian, whereas more accurate position would cost only
$50,000 per milliradian. In this case we should allow the attitude accuracy to degrade
and improve the position-accuracy requirement until the cost per milliradian is the
same for both. We will then have the lowest cost solution.

Target altitude

Uncertainty In the altitude of the observed object

Clock error

Uncertainty in the real observation time (results in
uncertainty in the rotational position of the Earth)

In practice we can seldom follow the above process. For example, we cannot
improve accuracy continuously. Rather, we must often accept large steps in both
performance and cost as we change methods or techniques. Similarly, we seldom
know precisely how much money or what level of performance to budget In practice
the mission designer strives to balance the components, often by relying on experience
and intuition as much as analysis. But the overall goal remains correct We should try
to balance the error budget so that incrementally improving any of th~ components
results in approximately comparable cost.
A practical method of creating an error budget is as follows. We begin by writing
down all of the components of the pointing and mapping budgets from Table 5-5. We
assume that these components are unrelated to each other, being prepared to combine
them later by taking the root sum square of the individual elements. (We will have to
examine this assumption in light of the eventual mission design and adjust it to take
into account how the error components truly combine.) The next step is to spread the
budget equally among all components. Thus, if all seven error sources listed in
Table 5-5 are relevant to the problem, we will initially assign an accuracy requirement
for each equid to the total accuracy divided by J1. This provides a starting point for
allocating errors. Our next step is to look at normal spacecraft operations and divide
the error sources into three categories:
(A) Those allowing very little adjustment
(B) Those easily meeting the error allocation established for them, and
(C) Those allowing increased accuracy at increased cost
Determining the spacecraft position using ground radar is a normal operation, and
the ground station provides a fixed level of accuracy. We cannot adjust this error
source without much higher cost, so we assign it to category (A) and accept its corresponding level of accuracy. A typical example of category (B) is the observation time
for which an accuracy of tens of milliseconds is reasonable with modem spacecraft
clocks. Therefore, we will assign an appropriately small number (say 10 IDS) to the
accuracy associated with the timing error. Attitude determination ordinarily falls into

126

Space Mission Geometry

5.4

TABLE 5-6. MappIng and PoInting Error Formulas. I; Is the grazing angle and latls the latitude
of the target,~ls the target azimuth relative to the ground track, Als the Earth central
angle from the target to the satellite, DIs the distance from the satellite to the target,
RT Is the distance from the Earth's centerto the target (typically - REo the Earth's
radius), and Rs Is the distance from the Earth's center to the satellite. See Fig. 5-20.

Error Source
Attitude
Errors:(7)

Error
Magnbude
(units)

Magnbudeof
Mapping Error
(km)

Magnbudeof
PoInting Error
(rad)

Azimuth

~(rad)

A'7(rad)

~~Dsln "
Dlsln I;

A~sln "

Nadir Arigle

~'7

A'7

In-Track

M(km)

M (RT/RsJ cos H(2)

(AI/D) sin Y,(5)

Cross-Track

~C(km)

AC (RT/RsJ cos G(3) (AC/D)sln

DIrectIon of
Error

Azimuthal
Toward nad..,

Development of Mapping and Pointing Budgets

5.4

Table 5-6 gives fonnulas relating the errorS in each of the seven basic components to
the overall error. Here the notation used is the same as in Fig. 5-20. For any given
mission conditions, these formulas relate the errors in the fundamental components to
the resulting pointing and mapping accuracies. Table 5-6 provides basic algebraic
information which we must transfonn into specific mapping and pointing requirements for a given mission. The general process of deriving these requirements is given
below. Representative mapping and pointing budgets based on these formulas are
given in Table 5-7
TABLE 5-7. Representative MappIng and PoInting Error Budgets. See Figs. 5-21 and 5-22
for correspond"mg plots.
Error Budgets

Position Errors:

Radial

127

ARs(km)

ARs sin '7/ sin

I;

YC(6)

(ARs/D) sin '7

Parallel to
ground track
Perpendicular
to ground track
Toward nadir

Source

Target Altitude

ART(km)

ART/tan I;

s/CClock

Ar(s)

AT Ve cos (/at) (4)

-

Toward nadir

AT (Ve' D) cos(lat) Parallel to
• sin J(7)
Earth's equator

Notes:
(1) Includes attitude determination error, Instrument mounting error, stabirrty over exposure time (mapping
only), and control error (POInting only). The formulas given assume thai the attitude Is measured wiIh
respect to the Earth.
(2) sin He sin ;tsln ¢.
(3) sin G e sin ;t cos ;.
(4) Va e 464 mls (Earth rotation velocity at the equator).
(5) cos Y, = cos ; sin 'I.
(6) cos Yc e sin ; sin 'I.
(7) cos Je cos ;ECOS 6. where

~Ee

azimuth relative to East.

category (C). Here we might have a gravity gradient-stabilized system accurate to a
few degrees with no attitude detennination cost at all, an horizon sensor system accurate to 0.05-0.10 deg, or a much more expensive star sensor system accurate to better
than 0.01 deg (see Sec. 11.1).
This process allows us to balance cost between the appropriate components and to
go back to the mission definition and adjust the real requirements. For example,
achieving a mapping accuracy of 100 m on the ground might triple the cost of the space
mission by requiring highly accurate attitude determination, a new system for
determining the orbit, and a detailed list of target altitudes. Reducing the accuracy
requirement to 500 m might lower the cost enough to make the mission possible within
the established budget constraints. This is an example of trading on mission requirements, descn"bed in Chaps. 2 to 4. Requirements trading is extremely important to a
cost-effective mission, but we often omit this in the normal process of defining
mission requirements.
To carry out this trade process; we need to know how an error in each of the components described in Table 5-5 relates to the overall mapping and pointing errors.

E= 10 deg

E=30deg

E=10deg

E=30deg

0.06deg
O.03deg

2.46
8.33

1.33
1.78

0.051
0.030

0.045
0.030

02km
02km
0.1 km

0.17
0.16
0.49

0.17
0.17
0.15

0.002
0.004
0.002

0.005
0.007
0.003

1 km
0.5 sec

5.67
023

1.73
023

-

-

0.005

0.008

10.39

2.84

0.000

0.055

MappIng Error (Ion)

PoInting Error (deg)

Atlitude Errors:
Azimuth
NadlrAngie

Other Errors:

Error
In
Source

Position Errors:
In-Track
Cross-Track
Radial

Other Errors:
.Target Altitude
s/CClock
Roof Sum Square

Defining Mapping Requirements
The errors associated with mapping depend strongly on how close to the horizon
we choose to work. Working in a very small region directly under the spacecraft
provides very poor coverage but excellent mapping accuracy and resolution (see
Fig. 5-21). On the other hand, working near the horizon provides very broad coverage
but poor mapping accuracy. Thus, we must trade resolution and mapping accuracy for
coverage. The mapping accuracy for a particular mission depends on the spacecraft's
elevation angle at the edge of the coverage region. In almost all cases the mapping
accuracy will be much better looking straight down. and the limiting accuracy will be
closest to the horizon. To assess satellite coverage, we look at the satellite's swath
width. That is, we assume the spacecraft can work directly below itself and at all
angles out to a limiting spacecraft elevation angle as seen from a target on the ground.
Accuracy characteristics as a function of elevation angle are more complex because
they involve combining several terms. A sample plot of mapping error as a function of
the spacecraft's elevation angle for a satellite at 1,000 km is in Fig. 5-22. This figure
is based on the equations in Table 5-6.
The total- mapping error is the root sum square of the individual components.
Generally. uncertaintY in target altitude and in attitude determination contn"bute most
to errors in mapping accuracy. In most cases improving other factors will have only a

128

Space Mission Geometry

5.4

Development of Mapplog and Pointing Budgets

5.4

Tr-----..--r------------------------------.

4

7,000

129

6,000
~3

!

5,000

3e

4,000

i

I

!~2
al

J

3,000
2,000

1

1,000

ot=~~==~~~~~~~~~
o

15

30

45

60

75

90

Spacecraft Elevation Seen from Ground (deg)
Spacecraft elevation Seen from Ground (deg)

Fig. 5-21.

Swath Width vs. Spacecraft Elevation Angle for a Spacecraft at Various
Altitudes. Note that the swath width increases dramatically at small elevation angles.

second-order effect. Consequently, determining target altitude and spacecraft attitude
are high priorities in assessing a mission's mapping performance and cost.
The uncertainty in target altitude typically contributes most to determining a
geographic location on the Earth. The oblateness of the Earth has the largest effect on
target altitude. It causes a variation in distance from the center of the Earth of
approximately 25 km between the poles and the equator. But we can account for this
factor analytically at very low cost, so it does not usually add to the error. The next
plateau is for airplanes, clouds, or other atmospheric features. The uncertainty in target
altitude at this level will typically be 10 km or larger unless we have some a priori
estimate of the altitude. For features on the Earth's surface, the uncertainty in target
altitude reduces to approximately I lan, unless data analysis includes a detailed map
of target altitudes. Figure 5-22 incorporates this I km error in target altitude as the
dominant source of error. Thus, for example, for FireSat to have a mapping error of
less than I Ian would require one of two arrangements. The spacecraft could work only
very near nadir and therefore have very poor coverage. Alternatively, it could inclUde
the elevation of the target region as a part ofdata reduction, therefore requiring the use
of a very large data base and making the data processing more complex.
The second principal contributor to mapping error is the uncertainty in attitude
determination, which varies widely over the following cost plateaus:
Accuracy Level (deg)
-10

-2
0.5
0.1
0.03
<0.01

Method

Gravity gradient spacecraft, no attitude
determination
Magnetometer only
Earth sensing, no oblateness corrections
General Earth sensing
High-accuracy Earth sensing
Star sensing

Mapplng.Error as a Function of Elevation Angle for a Spacecraft at 1,000 km
Altitude. Magnitudes of assumed error sources are marked.

Ag.5-22.

0.08
0.07

i

O.OS' AzImuth EmIr

0.06

:g.
~ 0.05

8'
"i

l

0.04
0.03
0.02

0.1 kin RadIal EmIr

0.5 sec Clock EmIr

\

0.D1
0
0

15

30

45

60

75

90

Spacecraft ElevatIon Seen from Ground (deg)

Ag.5-23.

Pointing Error asa Function of Elevation Angle for a Spacecraft at 1,000 km
Altitude. Magnitude of assumed error sources are marked.

Using these general limits in a model such as that of Fig. 5-22 allows us to assess
accuracies as a function of cost and coverage.

Defining Pointing Requirements
Unlike mapping, pointing depends only weakly on the spacecraft's elevation angle.
(See Fig. 5-23.) Thus, for missions which require only pointing, working in a region

130

Space Mission Geometry

near the horizon is almost as easy as pointing to a target or ground antenna at nadir. In
this case the working limit on the spacecraft's elevation angle depends on other
factors, such as the transmission of the atmosphere for a selected wavelength or possible obstruction by local geography. For example, ground stations ordinarily limit
their elevation to approximately 5 deg above the horizon because of the reduced atmospheric transmission at lower elevation angles.
Pointing requirements nonnaUy arise from the spacecraft's housekeeping functions
or from the need to point a particular instrument or antenna toward a ground target
Housekeeping requirements such as solar array pointing and orbit maneuvers ordinarily demand pointing accuracies of 0.25 to 1 deg. Consequently, for most missions,
the need to point the mission sensor or antenna is more important. Here again two
cases exist. If we wish to point the sensor at a single target, then we will generally try
to point the center of the sensor at the target. By doing so, we establish a pointing
requirement to place the target within the field of view. Specifically, if the payload
sensor's field of view is four times the 3a-pointing error, then the target will lie within
the field of view with a 60- probability, or virtual certainty. For example, if the FJreSat
sensor has a 1 deg square field of view, an overall pointing requirement of 0.25 deg
will assure that the target will be within the field of view.
In pointing we may also want to eliminate overlapping coverage. For example, if
we wish to take a series of pictures, we must overlap the pictures by more than the
pointing error to ensure continuous coverage of the ground This requirement, in turn,
implies that the spacing between pictures must equal the field-of-view size less the
pointing error. Thus, with a large pointing error, we must accept having fewer pictures
at a given time and increased resource costs in terms of time, power, and data rate for
a given level of coverage. It is common to have a pointing accuracy of 10% to 20% of
the field-of-view diameter. Driving the pointing under 10% of the field-of-view diameter will only slightly improve overall coverage. On the other hand, a pointing error
worse than 20% of the field-of-view size can require substantial overlap. thus greatly
diminishing the overall system's coverage and resource utilization.

References
Collins, Steve. 1992. "Geocentric Nadir and Range from Horizon Sensor Observations
of the Oblate Earth." AIAA Paper No. 92-176 presented at the AAS/AISS Spaceflight Mechanics Meeting. Colorado Springs. CO, Feb. 24-26.
Green, RM. 1985. Spherical Astronomy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Liu, K. 1978. "Earth Oblateness Modeling," in Spacecraft Attitude Determination and
Control, ed. James R Wertz. 98-106. Holland: D. Reidel Publishing Company.
Roy, A.E. 1991. Orbital Motion (3rd Edition). New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Smart, W.M. 1977. Textbook on Spherical Astronomy (6th Edition). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wertz, James R. 1981. "Global Geometry Techniques for Mission Analysis." in Proc.
Int. Symp. Spacecraft Flight Dynamics. Darmstadt, FRG. May 18-22 (ESA SP160, Aug. 1981).

Chapter 6
Introduction to Astrodynamics
Daryl G. Boden, United States Naval Academy
6.1 Keplerian Orbits

Satellite Equations ofMotion; Constants of
Motion; Classical Orbital Elements; Satellite
Ground Tracks; Tune of Flight in an Elliptical
Orbit; Orbit Determination

62 Orbit Perturbations
Third-Body Perturbations;
Perturbations Because ofa Nonspherical
Earth; PerturbationsjromAtmospheric Drag;
Perturbations from Solar Radiation
6.3 Orbit Maneuvering

Coplanar Orbit Transfers; Orbit Plane
Clumges; Orbit Rendezvous
6.4 Launch Windows

6.5 Orbit Maintenance

Astrodynamics is the study of a satellite's trajectory or orbit. that is. its path through
space. The satellite's ephemeris is a table listing its position as a function of time. The
first section below explains the terms used to describe satellite orbits, provides equations necessary to calculate orbital elements from position and velocity, and shows
how to predict the future position and velocity of a satellite. We base this method on
a simple, but accurate, model treating the Earth and the satellite as spherical masses.
The next section discusses how forces other than the Newtonian gravitational force
affect the OIbit of a satellite. The third section explains maneuvering strategies used to
change the satellite's orbit. The final two sections discuss the available launch times
and methods for maintaining satellite orbits.
Several textbooks are available in the areas of satellite orbits and celestial mechanics. Some of the most popular are Bate. Mueller, and White [1971], Battin [1999].
Danby [1962], Escobal [1965], Kaplan [1976], and Roy [1991]. More recently
Chobotov [1996], Wiesel [1996], and Vallado [1997] have provided works specificallyon spacecraft astrodynamics.

___.2001. Mission Geometry; Orbit and Constellation Design and Management.

Torrance. CA: Microcosm Press and Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.

131

132

Introdnction to Astrodynamles

6.1

Keplerian Orbits

6.1

133

6.1 Keplerian Orbits
Explaining the motion of celestial bodies, especially the planets, has challenged
observers for many centuries. The early Greeks attempted to describe the motion of
celestial bodies about the Earth in terms of circular motion. In 1543, Nicolaus Copernicus proposed a heliocentric (Sun-centered) system with the planets following circular orbits. Finally, with the help ofTycho Brahe's observational data, Johannes Kepler
described elliptical planetary orbits about the Sun. Later, Isaac Newton provided a
mathematical solution for this system based on an inverse-square gravitational force.
Kepler spent several years reconciling the differences between Tycho Brahe's careful observations of the planets and their predicted motion based on previous theories:
Having found that the data matched ,a geometric solution of elliptical orbits, he
published his first two laws of planetary motion in 1609 and his third law in 1619.
Kepler's three laws of planetary motion (which also apply to satellites orbiting the
Earth) are: .

2b

,
I
I

where F is the magnitude of the force caused by gravity, G is the universal constant of
gravitation, M is the mass of the Earth, m is the mass of the satellite, r is the distance
from the center of the Earth to the satellite, and Jl == GM is the Earth's gravitational
constant (= 398,6005 km3S-l).
Combining Newton's second law with his law of gravitation, we obtain an equation
for the- acceleration vector of the satellite:
(6-2)
This equation, called the two-body equation of motion, is the relative equation of
motion of a satellite position vector as the satellite orbits the Earth. In deriving it, we
assumed that gravity is the only force, the Earth is spherically symmetric, the Earth's
mass is much greater than the satellite's mass, and the Earth and the satellite are the
only two bodies in the system.

I

- -- --- ~ -----'.- -- --- -----2c'------

• First Law: The orbit of each planet is an ellipse, with the Sun at one focus.
• 'Second Law: The line joining the planet to the Sun sweeps out equal areas in
equal times.
• Third Law: The square of the period of a planet is proportional to the cube of
its mean distance from the Sun.
6.1.1 SatelHte Equations of Motion
Figure 6-1 depicts the key parameters of an elliptical orbit. The eccentricity, e, of
the ellipse (not shown in the figure) is equal to cia and is a measure of the deviation of
the ellipse from a circle.
Isaac Newton explained mathematically why the planets (and satellites) follow
elliptical orbits. Newton's Second Law of Motion, applied to a constant mass system
and, combined with his Law ofUniversal Gravitation, provides the mathematical basis
for analyzing satellite orbits. Newton's law of gravitation states that any two bodies
attract each other with a force proportional to the product of their masses and inversely
proportional to the square of the distance between them. The equation for the magnitude of the force caused by gravity is
F= -GMmlr2
== -Jl1TII r2
(6-1)

-----r------------

:..

: ..
I

~

28

:

~

.. :--IP-:

r: position vector of the satellite relative to Earth's center
V: velocity vector of the satellite relative to Earth's center
~: f1ight-path-angle, the angle between the velocity vector and a line
perpendicular to the position vector
a: semimajor axis of the eRipse
b: semiminor axis of the ellipse
c: the distance from the center of the orbit to one of the focil
v: the polar angle of the ellipse. also called the true anomaly. measured In the
direction of motion from the direction of perigee to the position vector
rA: radius of apogee, the distance from Earth's center to the farthest point on the
e1fipse
rp: radius of perigee, the distance from Earth's center to the point of closest
approach to the Earth
Fig. 6-1.

Geometry of an Ellipse and OrbHal Parameters.

A solution to the two-body equation of motion for a satellite orbiting Earth is the
polar equation ofa conic section. It gives the magnitude of the position vector in terms
of the location in the orbit,

r = a(1 - e2)/(1 + e cos v)
(6-3)
where a is the semimajor axis, e is the eccentricity, and v is the polar angle or true
anomaly.
A conic section is a curve formed by the intersection of a plane passing through a
right circular cone. As Fig. 6-2 shows, the angular orientation of the plane relative to
the cone determines whether the conic section is a circle, ellipse, parabola, or hyperbola. We can define all conic sections in terms of the eccentricity, e, in Ecj. (6-3)
above. The type of conic section is also related to the semimajor axis, a, and the
specific mechanical energy, &. Table 6-1 shows the relationships between energy,
eccentricity, and semimajor axis and the type of conic section.

134

Introduction to Astrodynamics

6.I

6.1

Keplerian Orbits

135

We also know that for a circle the semimajor axis equals the radius, which is
constant. Rearranging the energy equation, we find the velocity of a satellite in a
circular orbit.
Vcir = (Ill r)112

(6-5)

:;; 7.905 .366 (Re Ir)112
:;; 6313481 ,112
where ~Ir is the circular velocity in kmls, RE is the Earth's radius in km, and r is the
orbit's radius in km.
From Table 6-1, the energy of a parabolic trajectory is zero. A parabolic trajectory
is one with the minimum energy needed to escape the gravitational attraction of Earth.
Thus, we can calculate the velocity required to escape from the Earth at any distance,
r, by setting energy equal to zero in Eq. (6-4) and solving for velocity.
Vest" = (2111 r) 112

(6-6)

:;; 11.l79 88 (REI r)112
:;; 892.8611
\
Fig. 6-2.

Geometric OrIgin of Conic SectIons. Satellite orbits can be any of four

sections: a circle, an eIHpse, a parabola. or a hyperbola.

conic

Conic

Energy, S

Semlmajor Axis, a

Eccentricity, e

= radius

Ellipse

<0
<0

0
O<e<l

Parabola
Hyperbola

>0

Circle

0

where ~ is the escape velocity in kmls, and r is in kIn.
.
Another constant of motion associated with a satellite orbit is the specific angular
momentum, b, which is the satellite's total angular momentum divided by its mass. We
can find it from the cross product of the position and velocity vectors.

b=r xv

TABLE 6-1. Conic SectIons. See text for discussion.

>0
GO

<0

>1

6.1.2 Constants of Motion
Using the two-body equation of motion, we can derive several constants of motion
of a satellite orbit The first is
s= V2 /2-plr=-pl(2a)

(6-4)

where S is the total specific mechanical energy, or mechanical energy per unit mass,
for the. system and is the sum of the kinetic energy per unit mass and potential energy
per umt mass. We refer to Eq. (6-4) as the energy equation. Because the forces in the
system are conservative, the energy is a constant The term for potential energy, -"vr,
defines the potential energy to be zero at infinity and negative at any radius less than
infinity. Using this definition, the specific mechanical energy of elliptical orbits will
always be negative. As the energy increases (approaches zero), the ellipse gets larger,
and the elliptical trajectory approaches a parabolic trajectory. From the energy
Eq. (6-4), we find that a satel!ite moves fastest at perigee of the orbit and slowest at
apogee.

r-l12

(6-7)

We find that from Kepler's second law, the angular momentum is constant in
magnitude and direction for the two-body problem. Therefore, the orbital plane
defined by the position and velocity veCtors must remain fixed in inertial space.

6.1.3 Oassical Orbital Elements
When solving the two-body equations of motion, we need six constants of
integration (initial conditions) for the solution. Theoretically, we could find the three
components of position and velocity at any time in terms of the position and velocity
at any other time. Alternatively, we can completely describe the orbit with five
constants and one quantity which varies with time. These quantities, called classical
orbital elements, are defined below and are shown in Fig. 6-3. The coordinate frame
shown in the figure is the geocentric inertial frame: or Gel, defined in Chap. 5 (see
Table 5-1). Its origin is at the center of the Earth, with the X-axis in the equatorial
plane and pointing to the vernal equinox. Also, the Z-axis is parallel to the Earth's spin
axis (the North Pole), and the Y-axis completes the right-hand set in the equatorial
plane. The classical orbital elements are:
a: semimajor axis: describes the size of the ellipse (see Fig. 6-1).
e: eccentricity: describes the shape of the ellipse (see Fig. 6-1).
• A SUfficiently inertial coordinate frame is a coordinate frame that we can consider to be nonaccelerating fOI: the particular application. The Gel frame is sufficiently inertial when
considering Earth-orbiting satellites, but is inadequate for interplanetary travel because of its
rotational acceleration around the Sun.

136

Introduction to Astrodynamics

i:

Keplerian Orbits

6.1

inclination: the angle between the angular momentum vector and the unit
vector in the Z-direction.

.Q: right ascension ofthe ascending node: the angle from the vernal equinox to
the ascending node. The ascending node is the point where the satellite passes
through the equatorial plane moving from south to north. Right ascension is
measured as a right-handed rotation about the pole, Z.
(1): argument of perigee: the angle from the ascending node to the eccentricity
vector measured in the direction of the satellite's motion. The eccentricity
vector points from the center of the Earth to perigee with a magnitude equal
to the eccentricity of the orbit.
v: true anomaly: the angle from the eccentricity vector to the satellite position

vector, measured in the direction of satellite motion. Alternately, we could
use time since perigee passage, T.
z

TABLE 6-2. Computing the Classic Orbital Elements. For the right ascension of the ascending node, argument of perigee, and true anomaly, Hthe quantities In parentheses
are posltive, use the angle calculated. If the quantities are negative, the correct
value Is 360 deg minus the angle calculated.

-

Symbol

Name

Equation

a

semlmaJor axis

a =-J.l/(2&) = (IA + rp)/2

e

eccentricity

e= lei" 1 - (rpla) '" (rA /a)-1

Inclination

1= cos-1 (hzl h)

right ascension of
the ascending node

n", cos-1 (nxl n)

n

I (n·e»)
cos-1 [(e· r)/(e· r))

Quadrant Check

(ny> 0)

argument of perigee

al ., cos-1 [(n·e)

(ez>O)

v

true anomaly

V"

(r·y> 0)

rp

radius of perigee

rp=a(1-e)

rA

radius of apogee

rAe a(1 + e)

P

period

p= 2n(a 3 1 J.I)ll2
s 84.489 (al RE) 3I2 min
s 0.000 165 87 a 312 min, a In kin

(0

alo

Defined)

137

orbital frequency

(00

= CJ.II a 3 )112
s 631.34816 a-312radls, ain kin

orbits (e-=-6),a-.sing!~ angle, u == (() + v, can replace the argument of perigee and true
anomaly. This angle is the argument o/Iatitude and, when e = 0, equals the angle from
the nodal vector to the satellite position vector. Finally, ifthe orbit is circular and equatorial, then a single angle, I, or true longitude, specifies the angle between the X-axis
and the satellite position vector.
6.1.4 Satellite Ground Tracks

Rg. 6-3.

Definition of the Keplerlan Orbital Elements of a Satellite In an Elliptic Orbit. We
define elements relative to the Gel coordinate frame.

Given these definitions, we can solve for the elements if we know the satellite's
position and velocity vectors. Equations (6-4) and (6-7) allow us to solve for the
energy and the angular momentum vector. An equation for the nodal vector, n, in the
direction of the ascending node is
n=Zxh

(6-8)

We can calculate the eccentricity vector from the following equation:
e=(l/J.I.){(V2 - J.l.lr)r -(r·v)v}

(6-9)
Table 6-2 lists equations to derive the classical orbital elements and related parameters for an elliptical orbit.
Equatorial (i 0) and circular (e 0) orbits demand alternate orbital elements to
solve the equations in Table 6-2. These are shown in Fig. 6-3. For equatorial orbits, a
single angle, II, can replace the right ascension of the ascending node and argument
of perigee. Called the longitude ofperigee, this angle is the algebraic sum of.Q and w.
As i approaches 0, II approaches the angle from the X-axis to perigee. For circular

=

As dermed in Chap. 5, a satellite's ground track is the trace of the points formed by
the intersection of the satellite's position vector with the Earth's surface. In this section
we will evaluate ground tracks using a flat map of the Earth. Chapters 5 and 7 give
another approach of displaying them on a global representation.
Although ground tracks are generated from the orbital elements, we can gain
insight by determining the orbital elements from a given ground track. Figure .6-4
shows ground tracks for satellites with different orbital altitudes ~d, there.fore, ~ffer­
ent orbital periods. The time it takes Earth to rotate through the difference m longitude
between two successive ascending nodes equals the orbit's period. For direct orbits, in
which the satellite moves eastward, we measure the change positive to the east. For
retrograde orbits, in which the satellite moves westward, positive is measured to the
west." With these definitions, the period, P, in minutes is
P = 4( 360 deg - IlL) direct orbit

=

P

=4(1lL -

(6-10)

360 deg) retrograde orbit

-This convenient empirical definition does not apply for near polar orbits: More formally. a
prograde or direct orbit has i < 90 deg. A retrograde orbit has i > 90 deg. A polar orbit has
;=90 deg.

138

Introduction to Astrodynamics

6.1

(For a more precise rotation rate for the Earth, use 3.988 ·minldeg instead of 4.0 in
these equations.) where M. is the change in longitude in degrees that the satellite goes
through between successive ascending nodes. The difference in longitude between
two successive ascending nodes for a direct orbit will always be less than 360 deg, and
in fact, will be negative for orbits at altitudes higher than geosynchronous altitude. For
retrograde omits, the difference in longitude between two successive ascending nodes
(positive change is measured to the west) is always greater than 360 deg.

Keplerlan Orbits

6.1

139

c: GPS orbit, a =26,600 Ian, e =0, i =55.0 deg; and
D: Molniya orbits, a = 26,600 km, e

=0.75, i =63.4 deg, co = 270 deg.

Longitude
Fig. 6-5.

TypIcal Ground Tracks. (A) Shuttle parking, (8) Low-altitude retrograde, (C) GPS.
and (0) Molniya orbits. See text for orbital elements.

Longitude
Fig. 6-1.

Orbital Ground Tracks of Circular Orbits of DIfferent Periods. (A) IlL = 335.,
p= 100 min; (8) AL = 260°, P= 398 min; (C) IlL = 180°, P= 718 min; (0) IlL c 28",
P = 1,324 min; and (E) AL cO·, pc 1,436 min.

Once we know the period, we can determine the semimajor axis by using the
equation for the period of an elliptical orbit:

a = [(PI2tt)2 1l]113

(6-11)

:;:; 331.24915 p213 km
where the period is in minutes.
Figure 6-4 shows one revolution each for the ground tracks of several orbits with
an increasing semimajor axis. The period of a geosynchronous orbit, E, is 1,436 min,
matching the Earth's rotational motion.
We can determine the orbit's inclination by the ground track's maximum latitude.
For direct orbits the inclination equals the ground track's maximum latitude, and for
retrograde orbits the inclination equals 180 deg minus the ground track's maximum
latitude.
The orbit is circular if a ground track is symmetrical about both the equator and a
line oflongitude extending downward from the ground track's maximum latitude. All
the orbits in Fig. 6-4 are circular.
.
Figure 6-5 shows examples of ground tracks for the following typical orbits:

=6,700 km, e =0, i =28.4 deg;
B: Low-altitude retrograde orbit, a =6,700 km, e =0, i =98.0 deg;
A: Shuttle parking orbit, a

6.1.5 Time of Flight in an Elliptical Orbit
In analyzing Brahe's observational data, Kepler was able to solve the pro~lem of
relating position in the orbit to the elapsed time, t - to. or conversely, how long It takes
to go from one point to another in an orbit. To solve this, Kepler introduced the quantity M, called the mean anomaly, which is the fraction ofan orbit period which has
elapsed since perigee, expressed as an angle. The mean anomaly equals the true anomaly for a circular orbit. By definition,
M - Moen (t- to)

(6-12)

where Mo is the mean anomaly at time to and n is the mean motion, or average angular
veloci~. determined from the semimajor axis of the orbit:

n

=(Ill a3)112

(6-13)

:;:; 36,173.585 a-312 deg/s
:;:; 8,681,660.4 a-312 revlday
:;:; 3.125 297 7 x 10 9a-312 deglday
where a is in km.
This solution will give the average position and velocity, but satellite orbits are
elliptical, with a radius constantly varying in orbit. Because t~e satellite's velocity
depends on this varying radius, it changes as well. To resolve. ~s probl~ we define
an intermediate variable called eccentric anomaly, E, for elliptical orbits. Table 6-J
listS the equations necessary to relate time of flight to orbital position.

140

Introduction to Astrodymmdcs

TABLE 6-3.

6.1

TIme of flIght In an EllIptIc Orbit. All angular quantilies are In radians.

Variable

Name

Equation

n

mean motion

n

E
M

eccentric anomaly

cos E= (e+ cos v)/(1 + ecos v)

mean anomaly

M = E-esln (E)
M cMo+n(t-toJ

(Min lad)
(Min lad)

time of flight

t-~=(M

(t - to In sec)

true anomaly

v '" M + 2e sin M + 1.25e2 sIn(2M)

=CJt/a 3 )11Z
'" 631.348 16 a-ltI2 radls

t-

to

V

-Mo)ln

to =O.Os

v = 1.5708 rad

E =1.4706 rad
n = 0.001 08 radls

M

t

=1.3711 rad
=1,271.88 s

141

data is more accmatebut also requires a receiver and processor, which add weight. We
can also use GPS for semiautonomous orbit determination because it requires no
ground support. An alternative method for fully autonomous navigation is given by
Tai and Noerdlinger [1989] (See Sec. 11.2.)

(a In kin)

(approx.)

As an example, we find the time it takes a satellite to go from perigee to an angle
90 deg from perigee, for an orbit with a semimajor axis of 7,000 km and an eccentricity
of 0.1. For this example
Vo = EO = Mo = 0.0 rad

Orbit Perturbations

6.2

6.2 Orbit Perturbations
The Keplerian orbit discussed above provides an excellent reference, but other
forces act on the satellite to perturb it away from the nominal orbit We can classify
these perturbations, or variations in the orbital elements, based on how they affect the
Keplerian elements.
Figure 6-6 illustrates a typical variation in one of the orbital elements because of a
perturbing force. Secular variations represent a linear variation in the element Shortperiod variations are periodic in the element with a period less than or equal to the
orbital period. Long-period variations have a period greater than the orbital period.
Because secular variations have long-term effects on orbit prediction (the orbital elements affected continue to increase or decrease), I will discuss them in detail. If the
satellite mission demands that we precisely determine the orbit, we must include the
periodic variations as well. Battin [1999], Danby [1962], and Escobal [1965] describe
methods of determining and predicting orbits for perturbed Keplerian motion.

8ement

Finding the position in an orbit after a specified period is more complex. For this
problem, we calculate the mean anomaly, M, using time of flight and the mean motion
using Eq. (6-12). Next, we determine the true anomaly, v, using the series expansion
shown in Table 6-3, a good approximation for small eccentricity (the error is of the
order e3 ). If we need greater accuracy, we must solve the equation in Table 6-3 relating
mean anomaly to eccentric anomaly. Because this is a transcendental function, we
must use an iterative solution to find the eccentric anomaly. after which we can calculate the true anomaly directly.

;'

Secular

;'
;'

6.1.6 Orbit Determination
Up to this point, we have assumed that we know both the position and velocity of
the satellite in inertial space or the classical orbital elements. But we often cannot
directly observe the satellite's inertial position and velocity. Instead, we commonly
receive data from radar, telemetry, optics, or GPS. Radar and telemetry data consists
of range, azimuth, elevation, and possibly the rates of change of one or more of these
quantities, relative to a site attached to the rotating Earth. GPS receivers give GCI
latitude, longitude, and altitude. Optical data consists of right ascension and declination relative to the celestial sphere. In any case, we must combine and convert this data
to inertial position and velocity before determining the orbital elements. Bate Mueller,
and White [1971] and &cobal [1965] cover methods for combining data, so'I will not
cover them here.
The type of data we use for orbit determination depends on the orbit selected,
accuracy requirements, and weight restrictions on the spacecraft. Because radar and
optical systems collect data passively, they require no additional spacecraft weight,
but they are also the least accurate methods of orbit determination. Conversely, GPS

Orbit Period
Rg. 6-6.

11me

Secular and Periodic Variations of an Orbital Element. Secular variations
represenl Onear variations in the element, short-period variations have a period less
than the orbital period, and long-period variations have a period longer than the orbital
period.

When we consider. perturbing forces, the classical orbital elements vary with time.
To predict the orhit we must determine this time variation using techniques of either

142

Introduction to Astrodynamlcs

6.2

special or general perturbations. Special perturbations employ direct numerical integration of the equations of motion. Most common is Cowell's method, in which the
accelerations are integrated directly to obtain velocity and again to obtain position.
General perturbations analytically solve some aspects of the motion of a satellite
subjected to perturbing forces. For example, the polar equation of a conic applies to
the two-body equations of motion. Unfortunately, most perturbing forces don't yield
to a direct analytic solution but to series expansions and approximations. Because the
orbital elements are nearly constant, geneml perturbation techniques usually solve
directly for the orbital elements mther than the inertial position and velocity. The
orbital elements are more difficult to descnbe mathematically and approximate, but
they allow us to better understand how perturbations affect a large class of orbits. We
can also obtain solutions much faster than with special perturbations.
The primary forces which perturb a satellite orbit arise from third bodies such as
the Sun and the Moon, the non spherical mass distribution of the Earth, atmospheric
drag, and solar mdiation pressure. We describe each of t1!ese below.
6.2.1 Third-Body Perturbations
The gravitational forces of the Sun and the Moon cause periodic variations in all of
the orbital elements, but only the right ascension of the ascending node, argument of
perigee, and mean anomaly experience secular variations. These secular variations
arise from a gyroscopic precession ofthe orbit about the ecliptic pole. The secular variation in mean anomaly is much smaller than the mean motion and has little effect on
the orbit; however, the secular variationS in right ascension of the ascending node and
argument of perigee are important, especially for high-altitude orbits.
For nearly circular orbits, e2 is almost zero and the resulting error is of the order e2.
In this case, the equations for the secular mtes of change resulting from the Sun and
Moon are:

• Right ascension of the ascending node:

n
n

MOON

SUN

=-0.00338 (cosi)/n

= -0.00154 (cosi) I n

(6-14)
(6-15)

(6-18)
where J.t =GMis Earth's gravitational constant, RE is Earth's equatorial mdius, P.a are
Legendre polynomials, L is geocentric latitude, and.1;, are dimensionless geopotential
coefficients of which the first ~ are:
J2 = 0.00108263
J3 = -0.000 002 54
J4 = -0.000 001 61
This form of the geopotential function depends on latitude, and we call the geopotential coefficients,.1;" zonal coefficients. Other, more general expressions for the
geopotential include sectoral and tesseral terms in the expansion. The sectoral terms
divide the Earth into slices and depend only on longitude. The tesseral terms in the
expansion represent sections that depend on longitude and latitude. They divide the
Earth into a checkerboard pattern of regions that alternately add to and subtmct from
the two-body potential. A geopotential model consists of a matrix of coefficients in the
spherical harmonic expansion. The widely used Goddard Earth Model lOB, or
GEMlOB, is called a "21 x2l model" because it consists of a 21 x21 matrix of c0efficients. In order to achieve high accumcy mapping of the ocean surface and wave
properties, the TOPEX mission required creating a 100 x 100 geopotential model.
The potential genemted by the nonspherical Earth causes periodic variations in all
of the orbital elements. The dominant effects, however, are secular variations in right
ascension of the ascending node and argument of perigee because of the Earth's
oblateness, represented by the 12 term in the geopotential expansion. The mtes of
change of .Q and ro due to 12 are

.QJ2 =-1.5nJ2 (R E I ai(cosi)(l-e 2 )-2
712

== -2.064 74x 10 a-

o,MOON

o,SUN

a slight pear shape, and flattening at the poles. We can find a satellite's acceleration
by taking the gmdient of the gravitational potential function, tP. One widely used form
of the geopotential function is:

14

• Argument of perigee:
= 0.00169(4':"5 sin 2 i)1 n

= 0.000 77(4-5 sin 2 i)1 n

(6-16)
(6-17)

where i is the orbital inclination, n is the number of orbit revolutions per day, and iJ
and OJ are in deglday. These equations are only approximate; they neglect the variation caused. by the changing orientation of the orbital plane with respect to both the
Moon's orbital plane and the ecliptic plane.
6.2.2 Perturbations Because of a Nonspherical Earth
When developing the two-body equations of motion, we assumed the Earth has a
spherically symmetric mass distnbution. In fact, the Earth has a bulge at the equator,

143

Orbit Perturbations

(cosi)(1-e

(6-19)
2

)-2

WJ 2 =0.75nJ2 (RE I a)2(4-5sin 2 i)(1-e2 )-2

(6-20)

== 1.032 37x1014 a-712 (4-5 sin 2 i) (l_e 2 )-z

where n is mean motion in deg/day, RE is Earth's equatorial mdius, a is semimajor axis
in km, e is eccentricity, i is inclination, and iJ and
are in deg/day. Table 6-4
compares the rates of change of right ascension of the ascending node and argument
of perigee resulting from the Earth's oblateness, the Sun, and the Moon. For satellites
in GEO and below, the J2 perturbations dominate; for satellites above GEO the Sun
and Moon perturbations dominate.
Molniya orbits are highly eccentric (e == 0.75) with approximately 12 hour periods
(2 revolutions/day). Orbit designers choose the orbital inclination sO the rate of cbange
of perigee, Eq. (6-20). is zero. This condition occurs at inclinations of 63.4 deg and
116.6 deg. For these orbits we typically place perigee in the Southern Hemisphere, so

w

144

Introduction to Astrodynamics

Orbit Perturbations

TABLE 6-4. Secular Variations In Right Ascension of the Ascending Node and Argument
of Perigee. Note that these secular variations form the basis for Sun-synchronous
and Molniya orbits. For Sun-synchronous orbit,s the nodal pr.ecession rate is set to
0.986 deglday to match the general motion of the Sun.
Effectof~

Orbit
Shuttle

Effect of the Moon
(Eqs. 6-14, 6-16)
(deglday)
8=6,700 km, 9=0.0,1= 28 deg
(Eqs. 6-19, 6-20)
(deg/day)

Effect of the Sun
(Eqs. 6-15, 6-17)
(deglday)

.Q

-7.35

-0.000 19

-0.000 08

OJ

12.05

0.00031

0.000 14

Sun-Synchronous

8=6,728 km, 9=0.0, 1= 96.85 deg

.Q

0.986

0.00003

0.000 01

OJ

-4.890

-0.00010

-0.00005

GPS

8 = 26,600 km, 9 = 0.0, i=60.0deg

.Q

-0.033

-0.00085

-0.00038

OJ

0.008

0.00021

0.000 10

Molnlya

8 = 26,600 km, 9 = 0.75, 1= 63.4 deg

.Q

-0.30

-0.00076

-0.00034

OJ

0.00

0.00000

0.00000

Geosynchronous

8= 42,160 km, e=O,I=Odeg

.Q

-0.013

-0.00338

-0.00154

OJ

0.025

0.00676

0.00307

the satellite remains above the Northern Hemisphere near apogee for approximately
11 hourslorbit. Mission planners choose perigee altitude to meet the satellite's mission
constraints. Typical perigee altitudes vary from 200 to 1,000 km. We can calculate the
eccentricity and apogee altitude using the semimajor axis, perigee altitude, and equations from Table 6-2.
In a Sun-synchronous orbit, the satellite orbital plane remains approximately fixed
with respect to the Sun. We do this by matching the secular variation in the right
ascension of the ascending node (Eq. 6-19) to the Earth's rotation rate around the Sun.
A nodal precession rate of 0.9856 deglday will match the Earth's average rotation rate
about the Sun. Because this rotation is positive, Sun-synchronous orbits must be
retrograde. For a given semimajor axis, a, and eccentricity, we can use Eq. (6-19) to
find the inclination for the orbit to be Sun-synchronous.
6.2.3 Perturbations From Atmospheric Drag

The principal nongravitational force acting on satellites in low-Earth orbit is
atmospheric drag. Drag acts in the opposite direction of the velocity vector and
removes energy from the orbit. This energy reduction causes the orbit to get smaller,

145

leading to further increases in drag. Eventually, the altitude of the orbit becomes so
small that the satellite reenters the atmosphere.
The equation for acceleration due to drag on a satellite is:
aD = -(1/2)p (CD AI m)VZ

(6-21)

where p is atmospheric density; A is the satellite's cross-sectional area, m is the satellite's mass, V is the satellite's velocity with respect to the atmosphere, and CD is the
drag coefficient ~ 2.2 (See Table 8-3 in Sec. 8.1.3 for an extended discussion of CD).
We can approximate the changes in semimajor axis and eccentricity per revolution,
and the lifetime of a satellite, using the following equations:
(6-22)
l:J.arev = -21t (CDAlm)a2 Pp exp (-c) [10 + 2eItl
(6-23)
~rev = -21t (CDAlm)a Pp exp (-c) [I) + e (/0 +/2)12]
where p. is atmospheric density at perigee, c == ae / H, H is density scide height (see
column
Inside Rear Cover), and Ii are Modified Bessel Functions· of order; and
argument c. We model the term m I (CDA),or ballistic coeffici~nt, as a constan~ f?r
most satellites, although it can vary by a factor .of 10 depend10g on the satelhte s
orientation (see Table 8-3) .
For near circular orbits, we can use the above equations to derive the much simpler
expressions:
(6-24)
l:J.arw = -21t (CDA/m)pa 2
2
(6-25)
M'rw= -fJ1t2 (CDAlm)pa /V
(6-26)
AVTel' = 1t (CDAlm)pa V

25,

Aerev

=0

(6-27)·

where P is orbital period and V is satellite velocity.
A rough estimate of the satellite's lifetime, L, due to drag is
(6-28)

L~-HIAa,.ev

where, as above, H is atmospheric density scale height given in column 25 o~the Earth
Satellite Parameter tables in the back of this book. We can obtain a substantially more
accurate estimate (although still very approximate) by integrating Eq. (6-24), ~i~g
into account the changes in atmospheric density with both altitude and solar actlVlty
level. We did this for representative values of the ballistic coefficient in Fig. 8-4 in
Sec. 8.1.
6.2.4 Perturbations from Solar Radiation
Solar radiation pressure causes periodic variations in all of the orbital elements. Its
effect is strongest for satellites with low ballisti~ coefficients, that is: light v~hicle~
with large frontal areas such as Echo. The magmtude of the acceleration, aR' 10 mls
arising from solar radiation pressure is
aR~-4.5

x 1ij-6(1 +r)Alm

area exposed to the Sun in m2 ,

(6-29)

where A is the satellite cross-sectional
m is the satellite
mass in kg, and r is a reflection factor. (r = 0 for absorption; r = I for specular
• Values for I, can be found in many standard mathematical tables.

146

Introduction to Astrodynamlcs

6.3

Orbit Maneuvering

6.3

147

reflection at nonnal incidence; and r := 0.4 for diffuse reflection.) Below 800 krn
altitude, acceleration from drag is greater than that from solar radiation pressme;
above 800 kIn, acceleration from solar radiation pressure is greater.
Anal Orbit

6.3 Orbit Maneuvering
At some point during the lifetime of most satellites, we must change one or more
of the orbital elements. For example, we may need to transfer it from an initial parking
orbit to the final mission orbit, rendezvous with or intercept another satellite, or correct
the orbital elements to adjust for the perturbations discussed in the previous section.
Most frequently, we must change the orbital altitude, plane, or both. To change the
orbit of a satellite, we have to change the satellite's velocity vector in magnitude or
direction using a thruster. Most propulsion systems operate for only a short time compared to the orbital period, so we can treat the maneuver as an impulsive change in the
velocity while the position remains fixed For this reason, any maneuver changing the
orbit ofa satellite must occur at a point where the old orbit intersects the new orbit If
the two orbits do not intersect, we must use an intennediate orbit that intersects both.
In this case, the total maneuver requires at least two propulsive burns.
In general, the change in the velocity vector to go from one orbit to another is
given by
(~30)
AV = V NEED - VCURRENT
We can find the current and needed velocity vectors from the orbital elements,
keeping in mind that the position vector does not change significantly during impulsive burns.

6.3.1 Coplanar Orbit Transfers
The most common type of in-plane maneuver changes the size and energy of the
orbit, usually from a low-altitude parking orbit to a higher-altitude mission orbit such
as a geosynchronous orbit. Because the initial and final orbits do not intersect (see
Fig. ~7), the maneuver requires a transfer orbit. Figure ~7 represents a Hohmann"
Transfer Orbit. In this case, the transfer orbit's ellipse is tangent to both the initial and
final circular orbits at the transfer orbit's perigee and apogee, respectively. The orbits
are tangential, so the velocity vectors are collinear at the intersection points, and the
Hohmann Transfer represents the most fuel-efficient transfer between two circular,
coplanar orbits. When transferring from a smaller orbit to a larger orbit, the propulsion
system must apply velocity change in the direction of motion; when transferring from
a larger orbit to a smaller, the velocity change is opposite to the direction of motion.
The total velocity change required for the transfer is the sum ofthe velocity changes
at perigee and apogee of the transfer ellipse. Because the velocity vectors are collinear
at these points, the velocity changes are just the differences in magnitudes of the
velocities in each orbit. We can find these differences from the energy equation, if we
know the size of each orbit. If we know the initial and final orbits (rA and rB)' we
calculate the semimajor axis of the transfer ellipse, a/X9 and the total velocity change
• Walter Hohmann. a Gennan engineer and architect, wrote The Attainability o/Celestial Dodier
[1925), consisting of a mathematical discussion of the conditions for leaving and returning
to Earth.

Hohmann
Transfer
EDipse.

Initial Orbit

A~

6-7.

Hohmann Transfer. The Hohmann Transfer ellipse provides orbit transfer between
two circular, co-planar orbits.

(the sum of the velocity changes required at points A and B) using the following
algorithm. An example transferring from an initial circular orbit of 6,567 km to a finaI
circular orbit of 42, 160 km illustrates this technique.
STEP

EQUATIONS

1.

a/X

=(rA+ r B)/2

2.

fiA

= (Jl/'A)112 = 63 1.348 I {'A 112

3.

~

= (JlI rB )112

V/xA

= [J1{21'A - 1/On-)]I12

4.

EXAMPLE

=24,364km

r-

= 63 1.348 I {rar- l12

= 631.3481 [(21'A - 1/On-)]112
5.

V/XB

=7.79km1s
= 3.08 kmls

= 1025km1s

= [J1(2IrB -lIatt)]112

= 631.3481 [(2118 -lIatt )]112

= 1.59km1s

6.

AJA

= IVtxA

-

ViA I

=2.46km1s

7.

AVg

=I~ - VttBl

= 1.49km1s

8.

AVTOTAL = AJA

+ AVg

=3.95 kmls

9.

Time of transfer = PI2

=5hr 15 min

148

Introdnction to Astrodynamics

6.3

149

Orbit Maneuvering

6.3

Alternatively, we can write the total LlY required for a two-bum transfer between circular
orbits at radii rA and r8:
l!.VTOTAL

is

l!.JA + l!.Va

(6-31)

(6-32)

.JP

Transfer 8IIpse

=631.3481 whenl!.Vis in kmls and all of the semimajoraxesare in km. As in step I
where
above, alr=(r" + r8)12.
The above expression applies to any coplanar Hohmann transfer. In the case of small transfers
(that is, fA close to r8), we can approximate this conveniently in two forms:
l!.V '" VIA - VJB
l!.V lOS 0.5 (l!.r / r) VA/8

(6-33)
(6-34)
Fig. 6-8.

where

Transfer Orbit UsIng One-Tangent Bum between Two CIrcular, Coplanar Orbits.

(6-35)
and
(6-36)
To make the orbit change, we divide the l!.V into two small burns are of approximately equal
magnitude.
The result in Eq. (6-33) is more unusual than it might seem at first. Assume that a satellite is
in a circular orbit with velocity V;A. In two burns we increase the velocity by an amount l!.Y. The
result is that the satellite is higher and traveling slower than originally by the amount l!.V. We
can best clarifY this result by an example. Consider a satellite initially in a circular orbit at
400 km such that rA = 6,778 km and V;A = 7,700 mls. We will apply a totall!.Vof20 mls (= 0.26%
of JiA) in two burns of 10 mls each. From Eq. (6-34) the totall!.rw'ill 000.52% of 6,778 km or
35 km. Thus, the final orbit will be circular at an altitude of 6,813 km. Immediately following
the first burn of 10 mls the spacecraft will be at perigee of the transfer orbit with a velocity of
7,710 mls. When the spacecraft reaches apogee at 6,813 km it will have slowed according to
Kepler's second law by 0.52% to 7,670 mls. We then apply the second bum of 10 mls to circularize the orbit at 7,680 mls which is 20 mls slower than its original velocity. We have added
energy to the spacecraft which has raised the orbit and resulted in a lower kinetic energy but
sufficiently more potential energy to make up for both the reduced speed and the added l!. V.

Sometimes, we may need to transfer a satellite between orbits in less time than that.
required to complete the Hohmann transfer. Figure 6-8 shows a faster transfer called
the one-tangent burn. In this instance the transfer orbit is tangential to the initial orbit
It intersects the final orbit at an angle equal to the flight-path angle of the transfer orbit
at the point of intersection. An infinite number of transfer orbits are tangential to the
initial orbit and intersect the final orbit at some angle. Thus, we may choose the transfer orbit by specifying the size of the transfer orbit, the angular change of the transfer,
or the time required to complete the transfer. We can then define the transfer orbit and
calculate the required velocities.
For example, we may specifY the size ofthe transfer orbit, choosing any semimajor
axis that is greater than the semimajor axis of the Hohmann transfer e11ipse. Once we
know the semimajor axis of the e11ipse (air)' we can calcufate the eccentricity, angular
distance traveled in the transfer, the velocity change required for the transfer, arid the
time required to complete the transfer using the equations in Table 6-5.

TABLE 6-5. Computations for One-Tangent Bum Orbit Transfer. See ValJado [1997], for exampie. Given: 'A> 'B> and a,..
Quantity

Equation

eccentricity

e= 1- 'A/SIJt

true anomaly at second bum

V= cos-1[(slJt(1 - e2 ) 1'8 -1) Ie]

mght-path angle at second bum

<&=tan-1 [eslnVI(1 + ecos\?]

initial velocity

VIA = 631.3481

velocity on transfer orbit at Initial orbit

V/JtA = 631.3481 [21 'A -11 a,..)112

initial velocity change

AVA= (V/JtA- VIAl

final velocity

V/B = 631.3481 '8-112

velocity on transfer orbit at final orbit

VIJt8= 631.3481 [21 '8 -11 a,..]112

final velocity change

AVs=[Vf!il+ V,J-2V/BVlJt8cos <&)112

total velocity change

AVT = AVA + AVs

eccentric anomaly at 8

E= tarr1[(1- 9 2)112 slnvl (9+ COSY)]

tlmeofmght

TOF = 0.001 583 913 a,..312 (E- 9 sinE), Ein rads

'A-1I2

Table 6-6 compares the total velocity change required and time-of-flight for a
Hohmann transfer and a one-tangent burn transfer from a low altitude parking orbit to
geosynchronous orbit
Another option for changing the size of the orbit is to use a constant low-thrust
bum, which results in a spiral transfer. We can approximate the velocity change for
this type of orbit transfer by

AV= 1V2 - VII

(6-37)

where the velocities are the circular velocities of the two orbits. Following the

150

Introduction to Astrodynamies

6.3

TABLE !Mi. Comparison of Coplanar Orbit Transfers from LEO to Geosynchronous Orbit.
Variable

Hohmann Transfer

'A

6,570km

6,570km

'B

42,200km

42,200km

BIlt

24,385km

28,633km

t\Vr

3.935km1s

4.699km1s

TOF

5.256 hr

3.457hr

One-Tangent-Bum

previous example, the total velocity change required to go from low-Earth orbit to
geosynchronous is 4.71 km/s using a spiral transfer. We obtain this by subtracting the
results of step 3 from the results of step 2 in the above example.
6.3.2 Orbit Plane Changes
To change the orientation of the satellite's orbital plane, typically the inclination,
we must change the direction of the ~elocity vector. This maneuver requires a
component of t\ V to be perpendicular to the orbital plane and, therefore, perpendicular
to the initial velocity vector. If the size of the orbit remains constant, we call the
maneuver a simple plane change (Fig. 6-9A). We can find the required change in
velocity by using the law of cosines. For the case in which T'J is equal to Jj, this
expression reduces to
t\V= 2Jj sin (6/2)
(6-38)
where Jj is the velocity before and after the burn, and 6 is angle change required.

~v
v,

~
V,

A. Simple Plane Change
Fig. 6-9.

B. Combined Plane Change

Vector Representation of Simple and Combined Changes In Orbital Plene. For
the simple plane change, the magnitude of initial and final velocities are equal.

For example, the change in velocity required to transfer from a low-altitude
(h = 185 Ian) inclined (i = 28 deg) orbit to an equatorial orbit (i= 0) at the same altitude

Orbit Maneuvering

6.3

151

Typically, orbital transfers require changes in both the size and the plane of the
orbit, such as transferring from an inclined parking orbit at low altitude to a zero- '
inclination orbit at geosynchronous altitude. We do this transfer in two steps: a
Hohmann transfer to change the size of the orbit and a simple plane change to make
the orbit equatorial. A more efficient method (less total change in velocity) would be
to combine the plane change with the tangential burn at apogee of the transfer orbit
(Fig. 6-98). As we must change both the magnitude and direction of the velocity
vector, we can find the required change in velocity using the law of cosines:
(6-39)
where Jj is the initial velocity, T'Jis the final velocity, and 6 is the angle change
required.
For example, we find the total change in velocity to transfer from Ii Shuttle parking
orbit to a geosynchronous equatorial orbit as follows:

=42,159 Ian

rj = 6,563 km

rf

i;=28 deg

~=Odeg

V, =7.79 kmls

~

t\y;' = 2.46 kmls

= 3.08 kmls

Ma =1.83 kmls

t\VTOTAL =4.29 km/s

Completing a Hohmann transfer followed by a simple plane change would require
a velocity change of 5.44 km/s, so the Hohmann transfer with a combined plane

change at apogee of the transfer orbit represents a savings of 1.15 km/s. As we see
from Eq. (6-39), a small plane change (6 ~ 0) can be combined with an energy change
for almost no cost in t\V or propellant. Consequently, in practice, we do geosynchronous transfer with a small plane change at perigee and most of the plane change
at apogee.
Another option is to complete the maneuver using three bums. The first burn is a
coplanar maneuver placing the sateJlite into a transfer orbit with an apogee much
higher than the final orbit. When the satellite reaches apogee of the transfer orbit, it
does a combined plane change maneuver. This places the satellite in a second transfer
orbit which is coplanar with the final orbit and has a perigee altitude equal to the
altitude of the final orbit. Finally, when the satellite reaches perigee of the second
transfer orbit, another coplanar maneuver places the satellite into the final orbit. This
three-bum maneuver may save fuel, but the fuel savings comes at the expense of the
total time required to complete the maneuver.

is:
r=6,563 Ian

v,= 7.79 kmls

t\V= 3.77 kmls

From Eq. (6-38) we see that if the angular change equals 60 deg, the required
change in velocity equals the current velocity. Plane changes are very expensive in
terms of the required velocity change and resulting fuel consumption. To minimize
this, we should change the plane at a point where the velocity of the satellite is a
minimum: at apogee for an elliptical orbit In some cases, it may even be cheaper to
boost the satellite into a higher orbit, change the orbital plane at apogee, and return the
satellite to its original orbit

6.3.3 Orbit Rendezvous
Orbital transfer becomes more complicated when the objective is to rendezvous
with or intercept another object in space: both the interceptor and target must arrive at
the rendezvous point at the same time. This precise timing demands a phasing orbit to
accomplish the maneuver. A phasing orbit is any orbit which results in the interceptor
achieving the desired geometry'relative to the target to initiate a Hohmann transfer. If
the initial and final orbits are circular, coplanar, and ofdifferent sizes, then the phasing
orbit is simpiy the initial interceptor orbit (Fig. 6-10). The interceptor remains in the
initial orbit until the relative motion between the interceptor and target results in the

152

Introduction to Astrodynamics

6.3

des!red geometr.r. At that point, we inject the interceptor into a Hohmann transfer
Orbit. The equation to solve for the wait time in the initial orbit is:
Wait Time = (~; - ~f + 2kn;) 1(W;nr - C4gt}
(6-40)

Launch Windows

6.4

A. Interceptor slightly behind target:
Interceptor

153

B. Interceptor slightly ahead of target:
Interceptor

where ~fis the phase angle (angular separation of target and interceptor) needed for
rendezvous, ~i is the i~itial phase an~le, k is the number of rendezvous opportunities
(for the first Opportunity, k =0), Wln,IS the angular velocity of the interceptor: and ro '
is the angul~ veloci~ of the target. We calculate the lead angle, aL' by m~ltipIYi~g
wtgt by the time of flight for the Hohmann transfer and ~f is 180 deg minus aL'

Fig. 6-11.

Rendezvous from Same Orbit Showing the Target both Leading and Trailing
the Interceptor.

drift rate = 1,080 ~VIV

Fig. 6-10.

Geometry Depicting Rendezvous Between Two Circular, Coplanar Orbits. The
phase angle is the angular separation between the target and interceptor at the start
of the rendezvous and the lead angle is the distance the target travels from the start
until rendezvous occurs.

. The total time to rendezvous equals the wait time from Eq. (6-40) plus the time of
flight of the Hohmann transfer orbit.
The denominator in Eq. (6-40) represents the relative motion between the intercep~or and t~et. As ~e size of the interceptor orbit approaches the size of the target
Orbit, th~ relative motion approaches zero! and the wait time approaches infinity. If the
two Orbits are .exactly the same, then the mterceptor must enter a new phasing orbit to
rendezvous WIth the target (Fig. 6- I I). For this situation, the rendezvous occurs at the
point when: the .interceptor enter:s the phasing orbit. The period of the phasing orbit
~ the time It takes the target to get to the rendezvous point. Once we know the
~od, we c::an calculate the s:mimajor ax.is. The two orbits are tangential at their point
of m~on, so .the v~loci1y c~ange IS the difference in magnitudes of the two
VelOCities at the pomt of mtersectlon of the two orbits. Because we know the size of
the orbits, and therefore, the energies, we can use the energy Eq. (6-4) to solve for the
cur:rent and needed velocities.
Frequently oper:ator:s must adjust the relative phasing for satellites in circular orbits.
They accomplish this by making the satellite drift relative to its initial position. The
drift rate in deg/orbit is given by

(6-41)

where V is the nominal orbital velocity and ~ V is the velocity change required to start
or stop the drift.
The techniques described above move the target vehicle close to the interceptor.
Once the two vehicles are close to each other they begin proximity operations by solving a set of relative motion equations to achie:ve the final rendezvous. VaIlado [1997]
contains an excellent discussion of the solution to the nearby relative motion problem,
as addressed by the Clohessy-Wiltshire or Hill's equations of relative motion.

6.4· Launch Windows
Similar to the rendezvous problem is the launch-window problem, or determining
the appropriate time to launch from the surface of the Earth into the desired orbital
plane. Because the orbital plane is fixed in inertial space, the launch window is the
time when the launch site on the surface of the Earth rotates thfough th~ orbital plane.
As Fig. 6-12 shows, the launch time depends on the launch site's latitude and longitude and the satellite orbit's inclination and right ascension of the ascending node.
For a launch window to exist, the launch site must pass throUWt the orbital plane.
This requirement places restrictions on the orbital inclinations, i, possible from a
given launch latitude, L:
• No launch windows exist if L > i for direct orbit or L > 180 deg - i for
retrograde orbits.
• One launch window exists if L = i or L = 180 deg - i.
• Two launch windows exist if L < i or L < 180 deg - i.
The launch azimuth, 13, is the angle measured clockwise from nor:th to the velocity
vector. If a launch window exists, then the launch azimuth required to achieve an
inclination, i, from a given launch latitude, L, is given by:

154

Introduction to Astrodynamics

6.4

6.5

Orbit Maintenance

ISS

Having calculated the launch azimuth required to achieve the desired orbit, we can
now calculate the velocity needed to accelerate the payload from rest at the launch site
to the required burnout velocity. To do so, we use topocentric-horizon coordinates
with velocity components Vs, VE, Vz :

Vs = -Ji" cos q, cos Pb
VE =Vbo cos q, sin f3b Vz = Vbo sin q,

(6-45a)
VL

(6-45b)

(6-45c)
where Vbo is the velocity at burnout (usually equal to the circular orbital velocity at the
prescribed altitude), q, is the flight path angle at burnout, fJb is the launch azimuth at
burnout, and VL is the velocity of the launch site at a given latitude, L, as given by:
VL = (464.5 mls) cos L
Fig. 6-12.

(6-42a)

Equations (6-45c) do not include losses in the velocity of the launch vehicle because of atmospheric drag and gravity-approximately 1,500 mls for a typical launch
vehicle. A]so, in Eq. (6-45c) Vie assume that the azimuth at launch and the azimuth at
burnout are the same. Changes in the latitude and longitude of the launch vehicle
during powered flight will introduce small errors into the calculation of the burnout
conditions. We can calculate the velocity required at burnout from the energy eqUation
if we know the semimajor axis and radius of burnout of the orbit [Eq. (6-4»).

(6-42b)

6.5 Orbit Maintenance

Launch Window Geometry for Launches near the Ascending Node (1) and
Descending Node (2). The angles shown are the orbital IncDnation (/), launch site
latitude (L), and launch azimuth <fJ).

where

=

sin PI cos i I cos L

(6-46)

and

Once in their mission orbits, many satellites need no additional orbital adjustments.
On the other hand, mission requirements may demand that we maneuver the sateJJite

(6-42c)
where VL is tile inertial velocity of the launch site given by Eq. (6-46) below,
Veq = 464.5 mls is the velocity of Earth's rotation at the equator, and Vo "" 7.8 kmls is
the velocity of the satellite immediately after launch. PI is the inertial launch azimuth
and r is a small correction to account for the velocity contribution caused by Earth's
rotation. For launches to low-Earth orbit, r ranges from 0 for a due east launch to 3.0
deg for launch into a polar orbit The approximation for r in Eq. (6-42c) is accurate to
within 0.1 deg for low-Earth orbits. For launches near the ascending node, Pis in the
first or fourth quadrant and the plus sign applies in Eq. (6-42a). For launches near the
descending node, Pis in the second or third quadrant and the minus sign applies in
Eq. (6-42a).
Let 0, shown in Fig. 6-12, be the angle in the equatorial plane from the nearest node
to the longitude of the launch site. We can determine 0 from:
cos 0

=cos PIsin i

(6-43)
where 0 is positive for direct orbits and negative for retrogradC? orbits. Fmally, the local
sidereal time, LST, of launch is the angle from the vernal equinox to the longitude of
the launch site at the time of launch:

= .Q + 0
= .Q + 180 deg - 0

(launch at the ascending node)
(launch at the descending node)
where .Q is the right ascension of the ascending nooe of the resulting orbit
LST

(6-44)

to correct the orbital elements when perturbing forces.have changed them. Two particular cases of note are satellites with repeating ground tracks and geosynchronous
equatorial satellites, placed at an assigned longitude.
Using two-body equations of motion, we can show that a satellite wiJI have a
repeating ground track if it has exactly an integer number of revolutions per integer
number of days. Its period, therefore, must be:
p= (m sidereal days) I (krevolutions)

(6-47)

where m and k are integers, and 1 sidereal day = ],436.068 167 min. For example, a
satellite orbiting the Earth exactly 16 times per day bas a period of 89.75 min and a
semimajor axis of 6,640 km.
Next we would modiry the period of the satellite to account for the drift in the
orbital plane caused by the Earth's ob]ateness (J2). We can calculate the change in the
right ascension of the ascending node, MJ, because of J 2• fro~ the two-body orbital
elements. In this case the new period is:

=

PNEW PTWO BODY + lUJ/coEartb

(6-48)

Because we base the nodal drift on the two-body orbital elements, we must iterate
to find the new orbital period and semimajor axis. Continuing with the previous example. assume a perigee altitude of 120 Ian and an inclination of 45 deg. In this case, we
find that the cO!Dpensated period is 88.20 min and the new semimajor axis is 6,563 km.
Several examples of spacecmft placed in orbits with repeating ground tracks are
shown in Table 6-7.

156

Introduction to Astrodynamlcs

6.S

TABLE 6-7. Examples of Repeating Ground Tracks.

Satellite
SEASAT
LANDSAT 415
GEOSAT

SemImaJor Axis <k!n)

Revs

Days

108.0

7,169.0

43

3

98.2

7,On.7

233

16

108.05

7,162.7

244

17

Inclination (deg)

The Earth's oblateness also causes the direction of perigee to rotate around the
orbit. If the orbit is noncircular and the mission places limits on the altitude over
specific targets, we must control the location of perigee. One possibility is to select the
inclination of the orbit to be at the critical inclination (63.4 deg for a direct orbit and
116.4 deg for a retrograde orbit), so the location of perigee is fixed. If other constraints
make this selection impossible, we must maintain the orbit through orbital maneuvers.
We can change the location of perigee by changing the flight-path angle by an angle
9. Only the direction of the velocity vector changes, so we can find the change in velocity from the equation for a simple plane change:
L1V=2Vsin 912

(6-49)

A final consideration for a low-altitude orbit with repeating ground tracks is the
change in the semimajor axis and eccentricity due to atmospheric drag. Drag causes
the orbit to become smaller. As the orbit becomes smaller, the period also decreases,
causing the ground track to appear to shift eastward. If we specify some tolerance,
such as a maximum distance between the actual and desired ground tracks, the satellite
must periodically maneuver to maintain the desired orbit.
We can use Eq. (6-22) to calculate the change in semimajor axis per revolution of
the orbit. Given the change in the size of the orbit, we can also determine the change
in the period:
!lP =37t /la/(na)

(6-50)

If constraints exist for either the period or semimajor axis of the orbit, we can use
Eqs. (6-22) and (6-50) to keep track of the period and semimajor axis until we need to
correct the orbit. We can apply a tangential velocity change at perigee to adjust the
semimajor axis when required. Again, we can find the current and needed velocities
from the energy Eq. (6-4), because we know the size, and therefore the energy, of the
two orbits.
Geosynchronous equatorial orbits also require orbital maintenance maneuvers. Satellites in these orbits drift when perturbations occur from the nonsphericaI Earth and
from the third-body gravitational attraction of the Sun and Moon. Matching the period
of a geostationary orbit with the Earth's rotational velocity results in a resonance with
the .In term in the geopotential. This resonance term results in a transverse acceleration, that is, an acceleration in the plane of the orbit. This causes the satellite to drift in
longitude (Bast-West drift). The Sun and the ~oon cause out-of-plane accelerations
which make the satellite drift in latitude (North-South drift).
North-south stationkeeping is necessary when mission requirements limit inclination drift. If not corrected, the inclination oftbe orbit varies between 0 and 15 deg with
a period of approximately 55 years. The approximate equations to solve for the worstcase change in velocity are:

6.5

157

Orbit Maintenance

L1VMOON = 102.67 cos a sin a (mlsIyr)
= 36.93 mls per year, for i = 0
L1VSUN = 40.17 cos rsin r(mlsIyr)

(6-51)
(6-52)

=14.45 mls/yr, for i =0
where a is the angle between the orbital plane and the Moon's orbit, and ris the angle
.
.
.
between the orbital and ecliptic plane.
The transverse acceleration caused by resonance WIth the .Tn term results m penodic motion about either of two stable longitudes at appr?~ly:5 deg and 25~ deg
East longitude. If we place a satellite at any other longttude, It will tend to orbit ~e
closest of these two longitudes, resulting in East-West ~ of up to ~80 de~ WIth
periods of up to 900 days. Suppose a mission for a geostationary satellite ~es a
required longitude, lD' The change in velocity required to. com~te for the drift and
maintain the satellite in the vicinity of the specified longttude IS:
L1V= 1.715 sin (2 lID -

l.b

(6-53)

where 1 is the desired longitude, 1 is the closest stable longitude, and L1Vis in mis/yr.
For ~xample, we find the vel~ity change required for one year if the desired longitude is 60 deg west as
lD =-60deg

l.=255 deg

L1V = 1.715 mlS/yr

After the mission of the satellite is complete, several options exist, depending on
the orbit. We may allow low-altitude orbits to decay and reenter the ~tmosphere?I" use
a velocity change to speed up the process. Vf~ may also ~st sa~llites ~t all altitudes
into benign orbits to reduce the probability of collisIOn WIth active paylo~,
especially at synchronous altitudes or when the sa~lIite is part of a large constellation.
Because coplanar velocity changes are more effiCIent than plane changes, we would
normally apply tangential changes in velocity. Their ma~tud~ would depend on the
difference in energy of the two orbits. Generally, a change m altitude of a few hundred
kilometers is sufficient to prevent collisions within a constellation. If we increase the
altitude of the orbit for disposal, we must make sure atmospheric drag does not cause
the disposal orbit to decay and return the spacecraft to the original a1ti~de of the co~­
stellation. If we choose to deorbit our satellite, the velocity change required to deorbit
a satellite in a circular orbit at initial altitude, HI' and velocity, V, is:

(6-54a)

(6-54b)
where R is the radius of the Earth and He is the perigee altitude at the end of the bum.
It is got necessary to reduce perigee altitude to 0 km. Choosing a 50 km deorbit
altitude would reduce the FireSat L1Vdeorbit to 183 mls. Note that we reduce only

158

Introduction to Astrodyuamics

6.5

perigee in the deorbit"bum. Reducing perigee to 100 to 150 Ion could result in several
orbits over which apogee decreases before the spacecraft reenters and might not allow
adequate contrcI of the deorbit conditions.

Chapter 7

References

Orbit and Constellation Design

Bate, Roger R., Donald D. Mueller, and Jerry E. White. 1971. Fundamentals ofAstrodynamics. New York: Dover Publications.

James R. Wertz, Microcosm, Inc.

Battin, Richard H. 1999. An Introduction to the Mathematics andMethods ofAstrodynamics. New York: AIAA Education Series.
Chobotov,. Vladimir A. 1996. fJrbital Mechanics (2nd Edition). New York: AIM
Education Series.
Danby, J.M.A. 1962. Fundamentals o/Celestial Mechanics. New York: Macmillan.
Escobal, Pedro R. 1965. Methods of Orbit Determination. Malabar, FL: Robert E.
Krieger Publishing Company.
,
Hohmann, Walter. 1925. Die Erreich Barkeit de HimmelskOrper. (The Attainability of
Heavenly Body). NASA Technical Translation TTF44. Nov. 1960. Washington,
DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

7.1 The Orbit Design Process
7.2 Earth Coverage
Analytic Approximtllions; Numerical Simulations;
Coverage Figures ofMerit
7.3 The 6 V Budget
7.4 Selecting Orbits for Earth-Referenced Spacecraft
7.5 Selecting Transfer, Parking. and Space-Referenced Orbits
Selecting a Transfer Orbit; Parking and Space-Referenced
Orbits

7.6 Constellation Design
Coverage and Constellation Structure;
Summary of Constellation Design

Kaplan. Marshall H. 1976. Modem Spacecraft Dynamics and Control. New York:
Wiley and Sons.
King-Hele, D. 1964. Theory of Satellite Orbits in an Atmosphere. London: Butterworths Mathematical Texts.
.
Poeha, JJ. 1987. An Introduction to Mission Design for Geostationary Satellites.
Boston: D. Reidel Publishing Company.
Roy, A.B. 1991. Orbital Motion (3rd Edition). Bristol and Philadelphia: Adam Hilger.
Tai, Frank and Peter D. Noerdlinger. 1989. A Low Cost Autonomous NaVigation
System, Paper No. AAS 89-001 presented to the 12th AniJuaI AAS Guidance and
Control Conference. Keystone, Colorado, Feb. 4-8.
vaUado, David A. 1997. Fundamentals of Astrodynamics and Applications. New
York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Wiesel, William E. 1996. Spaceflight Dynamics (2nd Edition). New York: McGrawHill Book Company.

Chapters 5 and 6 introduced the geometry and pbysics of spacecraft orbits, as' well
as formulas for computing orbit parameters. In contrast, this chapter deals with selecting or designing orbits to meet the largest number of mission requirements at the least
possible cost. The orbit selection process is complex, involving trades between a
number of different parameters. The orbit typically defines the space mission lifetime,
cost, environment, viewing geometry, and, frequently, the payload performance. Most
commonly, we must trade the velocity required to achieve the orbit as a measure of
cost vs. coverage performance.
Chapter 6 lists several references on astrodynamics. Unfortunately, very few of
these references contain any discussion of the orbit selection or design process.
Chobotov [1996] and Vallado [1997] have some information. By far the most extensive discussion of this topic is in Wertz [2001]. Soop [1994] contains an excellent
discussion of the design of geostationary orbits.
Ordinarily, spacecraft will be in various orbits during the space mission life. These
could include, for example, a parking orbit for spacecraft checkout or storage, a
transfer orbit to move it from the injection orbit where the spacecr.aft separated from
the launch vehicle to its operational orbit or orbits for mission activities, and possibly
a finaI disposal orbit where the spacecraft will do minimum damage when we are
through using it. In early mission design, we pay most attention to defining the spacecraft's operational orbit. However, preliminary mission design needs to consider aU
mission phases to meet the needs of more complex missions.

159

160

Orbit and CODSteDatiOD Design

7.1

7.1 The Orbit Design Process
Orbit design has no absolute rules; the method described below and summarized in
Table 7-1 gives a starting point and checklist for the process.
TABLE 7-1. Summary of the Orbit SelecUon Process. See text for discussion of each step.
Step

1. Establish orbit types.
2. Determine orbit-related mission requirements.
3. Assess applicability of specialized orbits.
4. Evaluate whether single satellite vs. consteUation is needed.
5. Do mission orbit design trades
- Assume circular orbit (if appOcable)
- Conduct aJtitudeJinclination trade
- Evaluate use of eccentric orbits
6. Assess launch and retrieval or disposal options.
7. Evaluate consteliation growth and replenishment (if applicable).
8. Create l!.V budget

Where DIscussed

Sec. 7.1
Sec. 7.1
Sees. 7.4, 6.3
Sees. 7.1, 7.6
Sees. 7.4, 7.5
Sec. 7.4
Sec. 7.4
Sees. 2.1, 6.5, 18.3,21.2
Sec. 7.6
Sec. 7.3

9. Document orbit parameters, selectIon criteria, and allowed ranges.
Iterate as needed.

Effective orbit design requires clearly identifying the reasons for orbit selection.
reviewing these reasons regularly as mission requirements change or mission definition improves, and continuing to remain open to alternatives. Several different designs
may be credible. Thus, communications may work effectively through a single large
satellite in geosynchronous orbit or a constellation of small satellites in low-Earth
orbit. We may need to keep both options for some time before selecting one.
Step 1. Establish Orbit Types
To design orbits we first divide the space mission into segments and classify each
segment by its overall function. Each orbit segment has different selection criteria, so
we evaluate it separately, placing it into one of the four basic types:
• Parking Orbit-a temporary orbit which provides a safe and convenient
location for satellite checkout. storage between operations, or at end-of-life.
Also used to match conditions between phases such as post-launch and preorbit transfer.

• Transfer Orbit-used for getting from place to place. Examples: transfer orbit
to geosynchronous altitude; interplanetary orbit to Mars.

• Space-referenced Orbit-an operational orbit whose principal characteristic is
being somewhere in space (specific orbit parameters may not be critical).
Examples: Lagrange point orbits for space sampling and observations; orbits
for celestial observations or space manufacturing.

• Earth-referenced Orbit-an operational orbit which provides the necessary
covemge of the surface of the Earth or near-Earth space. Examples: geosynchronous satellites, low-Earth satellites for Earth resources, meteorology, or
communications.

7.1

The Orbit Design Proeess

161

A Shuttle-launched communications satellite in geosynchronous orbit provides an
example of dividing a mission into segments. Once ejected from the Shuttle, the spacecraft may briefly stay in a parking orbit near the Shuttle to provide test and checkout
of spacecraft and tmnsfer vehicle systems. The second mission segment uses a transfer
orbit to move the spacecmft from its parking orbit to geosynchronous equatorial orbit.
The spacecraft theIi enters its opemtional orbit in the geostationary ring where it will
spend the rest of its active life. At the end of its life we must move it out of the geostationary ring to avoid a possible collision with other satellites and to free the orbital slot
for a replacement. (See Sec. 21.2.) Putting the nearly dead spacecraft into a final
disposal orbit above the geostationary ring requires a relatively small tmnsfer orbit.
(Going above. the geostationary ring mther than below avoids co~ons with other
satellites in geosynchronous transfer.)
Step 2. Establish Orbit-Related Mission Requirements
For each mission segment, we define the orbit-related requirements. They may
include orbital limits, individual requirements such as the altitude needed for specific
observations, or a range of values constmining any of the orbit parameters. Section 7.4
discusses in detail the requirements we would follow in designing an operational orbit.
Ordinarily, these multiple requirements drive the orbit in different directions. For
example, resolution or required aperture tend to drive the orbit to low altitudes, but
covemge, lifetime, and surviVability drive the spacecraft to higher altitudes.
Selecting of parking, transfer, and space-referenced orbits is normally conceptually
simpler, although it may be mathematically complex. Here the normal tmde is meeting
the desired constmints on a mission. such as lifetime, thermal, or mdiation environments, at the lowest possible propellant cost. Section 7.5 discusses the key mission
requirements for these orbits.
Step 3. Assess Specialized Orbits
In selecting the orbit for any mission phase, we must first determine if a specialized
orbit applies. Specialized orbits are those with unique chamcteristics, such as the
geostationary ring in which satellites can remain nearly stationary over a given point
on the Earth's equator. We examine each specialized orbit to see if its unique characteristics are worth its cost. This examination precedes the more detailed design tmdes,
because specialized orbits constmin parameters such as altitude or inclination, and
thus often lead to very different solutions for a given mission problem. Consequently,
we may need to carry more than one orbit into more detailed design tmdes.
Step 4. Choose Single Satellite or Constellation
The principal advantage of a single satellite is that it reduces cost by minimizing
the mission overhead. Thus, one satellite will have one power system, one attitude
control system, one telemetry system, and require only a single launch vehicle. A
constellation, on the other band, may provide better coverage, higher reliability if a
satellite is lost, and more survivability. We may also need a constellation to provide
the multiple conditions to carry out the mission, such as varying lighting conditions
for observations, varying geometries for navigation. or continuous covemge of part or
all of the Earth for a communications constellation.
To meet budget limits, we must often tmde a single large satellite with larger and
more complex instruments against a constellation of smaller, simpler satellites. This

162

Orbit and CoDStellatlon Design

7.1

decision ~y depend on the technology available at the time of satellite design. As
small satellites ~ome more capable through miniaturized electronics (Chap. 22) and
onboard pr~g (Chap. 16), we ~y be able to construct constellations of small,
low-cost satellites, frequently called LightSars, that were not previously economically
feasible. Another major cost element for large constellations is the operational
problem of providing continuous navigation and control. The introduction oflow-cost
~utonomous navigation and control (See Sec. 11.1) should promote larger constellations of small satellites in the future.
Step 5. Do Mission Orbit Design Trades
The next ~.is to sel~t the mission orbit by evaluating how Orbit parameters affect
eac~ of the DI1SSJon reqwrements from Table 7-6 in Sec. 7.4. As the table shows orbit
d~Jgn deJx:nds principally on altitnde. The easiest way to begin is by assunrlng a
circular ~Jt and then cond~g altitnde and inclination trades. (See Sec. 7.4 and the
~x~pl~ m Sec. 3.3.1:) This process establishes a range of potential altitndes and
mclinations, from which we can select one or more alternatives. Documenting the
res~ts of ~ k~y trade ~ particularly important, so we can revisit the trade from time
to time as DI1SSJOn reqwrements and conditions change. If a satellite constellation is
one of the alternatives, then phasing the satellites within that constellation is a key
characteristic, as Sec. 7.6 describes.
. Note that constellations of satellites are normally at a common altitnde and inclination .because the orbit's drift characteristics depend largely on these parameters.
S~lli~ at «.fifferent alti.tnru:s or inclinations will drift apart so that their relative
onentation will change WIth time. Thus, satellites at different altitndes or inclinations
normally do not work well together as a constellation for extended times.
Step 6. Assess Launch and Retrieval or Disposal Options
Chapter 18 discusses satellite launch systems in detail. The launch vehicle contn"butes strongly to mission costs, and ultimately will limit the amount of mass that can be
pla~ in an orbit of any giv~ altitnde. As we define the mission early on, we must
proVIde enough launch margm to allow for later changes in launch vehicles or
s~acecraft weight Natnrally, new designs require more margin than existing ones
WIth 20% being typical for new missions.
'
Although given little consideration in the past, retrieval and disposal of spacecraft
have become important to mission design (Sec. 21.2). Spacecraft that will reenter the
atmosphere must either do controlled reentry, bum up in the atmosphere or break up
into harmless pieces.
'
If the spacecraft will not reenter the atmosphere fu a reasonable time we must still
dispose o~ it at ~ end of its use!'nllife so it is not hazardous to other ~ This
problem IS particularly acute m geosynchronous orbit where missions compete
strongly for orbit slots.- As Sec. 21.2 points out, a collision between two spacecraft
not onl~ desln?Ys ~em bu~ also ~ debris dangerous to their entire orbit regime.
A third option IS satellite retrieval, done either to refurbish and reuse the satellite
or to recover material (such as radioactive products) which would be dangerous if they
entered the atmosphere uncontrolled. Currently, the Shuttle can retrieve spacecraft
• Cefola [1987] gives. an excellent analysis of the requirements for removing satellites from
geosynchronous orbit.

7.2

Earth Coverage

163

only from low-Earth orbit In the futnre, it would be desirable to retrieve satellites as
far away as geosynchronous orbit and retnm them to either the Orbiter or Space
Station for refurbishment, repair, disposal, or reuse.
Step 7. Evaluate Constellation Growth and Replenishment
An important characteristic of any satellite constellation is growth, replenishment,
and graceful degradation. A constellation that becomes operational only after many
satellites are in place causes many economic, planning, and checkout problems.
Constellations should be at least partly serviceable with small satellite numbers.
Graceful degradation means that if one satellite fails, the remaining satellites provide
needed services at a reduced level rather than a total loss of service. Section 7.6
discusses further the critical question of how we build up a constellation and how to
plan for graceful degradation.
Step 8. Create 11V Budget
To numerically evaluate the cost of an orbit, we must create a 11V budget for the
orbit, as described in Sec. 7.3. This then becomes the major component of the propellant budget as described in Sec. 10.3.
Step 9. Document and Iterate
A key component of orbit or constellation design is documenting the mission
requirements used to define the orbit, the reasons for selecting the orbit, and the
numerical values of the selected orbit parameters. This baseline can be reevaluated
from time to time as mission conditions change. Because mission design nearly always
requires many iterations, we must make the iteration activity as $1raightforward as
possible and readdress orbit parameters throughout the design process to ensure they
meet all requirements.

7.2 Earth Coverage
Earth coverage refers to the part of the Earth that a spacecraft instrument- or
antenna can see at one instant or over an extended period. The coverage available for
a particular location or region is frequently a key element in mission design. In evaluating coverage, two critical distinctions must be made. FIrSt, as Fig. 7-1 shows, the
instantaneousjield o/view, typically called the FOVor/ootprinJ, is the actnal area the
instrument or antenna can see at any moment In contrast, the access area is the total
area on the ground that could potentially be seen at any moment by turning the spacecraft or instrument In the case of a truly omni-directional antenna, these two would
always be the same. For most operational instruments they are not
The second important distinction is between the area which can be seen at anyone
instant vs. the rate at which new land comes into view as tlJe spacecraft and instrument
move. Both are important, and either can be vital to mission success. In geosynchronous orbit, the instantaneous area is typically most important because the spacecraft is
• Throughout this section we will use irz:rtrwnent to refer to any spacecraft sensor or antenna for
which we want to compute coverage.

164

Orbit and CoDSteJlation Design

7.2

Earth Coverage

7.2

165

7.2.1 Analytic Approximations

Ag.7-1. The Instrument Footprint or FOVIs the Instantaneous Region on the Ground BeIng Covered. The instantaneous access area IS the total area In view.

In this section we present analytic approximations for various Earth coverage
parameters. All of the formulas here take into account ~ spherical surface of the
Earth. but do not account for oblateness, or the rotation of the Earth underneath the
orbit These effects, in addition to those of coverage by multiple satellites. are ordinarily accounted for in numerical simulations as described in Sec. 7.2.2.
All of the formulas here are ~ved directly from the single-satellite geometry
described in Sec. 5.2. In particular, we will use the notation developed there and
summarized in Fig. 5-13 in Sec. 5.2. In this section we will parameterize coverage in
terms of the Earth central angle, A... However, we can use Eqs. (5-24) to (5-28) to
transform each of the formulas below into one for either the spacecraft-centered nadir
angle, 11, or spacecraft elevation angle, E, seen from the ground.
As Fig. 7-1 shows, the instrument footprint is normally a beam with circular cross
section substantially smaller than the access area projected onto the Earth's surface.
The nomenclature and computational geometry for the footprint are in Fig. 7-2. (.For
instruments which see very large portions of the Earth, we can use the access area
formulas below. For those which have noncircular cross sections, the logic here along
with the formulas of Sec. 5.2 allows us to develop mission-specific formulas for
footprint size and area.)

nearly stationary relative to the Earth's surface. In low-Earth orbit, satellites are moving rapidly over the surface, so the rate at which new land appears is usually critical.
The two distinctions above lead to four key parameters for Earth coverage:

• Footprint Area (fA. ' also FOVarea or instantaneous coverage area)
that a specific instrument or antenna can see at any instant

=area

• Instantaneous Access Area (lAA) =all the area that the instrument or antenna
could potentially see at any instant if it were scanned through its normal range
of orientations.
• Area Coverage Rate (ACR) =the rate at which the instrument or antenna is
sensing or accessing new land.
• Area Access Rate (AAR) =the rate at which new land is coming into the spacecraft's access area.
Earth Center

For an instrument which covers all of the area available to it as the spacecraft moves
along, the coverage rate and access rate will be the same. For instruments operating
only part of the time or continuously selecting the region to be examined, the coverage
rate and access rate may be dramatically different Generally the access area and
access rates depend only on the orbit and limiting geometry of the system, so we can
easily compute them with only a minimal knowledge of the detailed system design. On
'the other hand, the actual area coverage rate during spacecraft operations may well
depend on the spacecraft control, power, and management systems, as well as the
details of mission operations.
Coverage assessment conveniently divides into two areas: first, an analytic assessment to provide approximate formulas for coverage parameters as a function of
mission variables; second, numerical simulations to provide coverage Figures of Merit
for more detailed studies.

fig. 7-2.

Computational Geometry for Instrument Footprint. Note that s Is typically measured at the toe because of performance budgeting. (See also Rg. 5-13.)

The length (also called the height) of the footprint, LF , is given by
LF

=KL (AFo - AFl)

(7-1a)

=Dsin 81sin E

(7-lb)

where the variables are defined in Fig. 7-2 and, for A expressed in degrees,
• A. may be thought of ~ther as an angle at the Earth's center or as a distan~ measured along the
Earth's swface. We will use these two views interchangeably as convement for the problem
at band.

166

Orbit and Constellation Design

KL=1

for length in deg

KL = 111.319543

for length in Ion

=60.107 744 7

for length in nmi

KL

7.2

Note: The linear approximation given in Eq. (7-1b) is computationally convenient
but can be very inaccurate, particularly near the horizon where eis small. (For a satellite at an altitude of 1,000 Ion with it 1 deg diameter beam, the error in Eq. (7-1b) is
400% at e= 1 deg, 10% at e= 15 deg, and 1% at E= 60 deg.) However, the alternative
computation of Eq. (7-1a) is much less convenient To find the footprint length for a
given spacecraft elevation angle at the toe of the beam, e, we begin by computing 17
and A at the toe, then subtract the beam width, 8, from 17 to determine 17 at the heel,
compute A at the heel, and finally subtract to get the footprint length from Eq. (7-1a).
An alternative that improves the approximation somewhat is to use the center rather
than the toe of the beam. Because the toe represents the worst-case link budget (see
Chap. 13), it is most often used for performance computations and, therefore, is
commonly used for geometry calculations as well.
The footprint width, WF , is given by
WF = RE sin-l (Dsin 81RE>

167.

Earth Coverage

7.2

Computing the instantaneous access area, fAA, will depend on the shape of the
potential coverage area on the ground. Figure 7-3 shows several typical shapes. The
most common of these is Fig. 7-3A., which assumes that the instrument can work at
any point on the Earth within view for which the spacecraft elevation is above E. This
corresponds to a small circle on the Earth of radius A centered on the current subsatellite point. Some instruments, such as radar, cannot work too close to the subsatel. lite point. As Fig. 7-3B shows, these instruments have both an outer horizon, AI. and
an inner horizon, ~.
Ground Track

(7-2a)

=Dsin 8

(7-2b)
where ~ =6,378.14 Ion is the radius of the Earth, 8 is the beam width, and D is the
distance from the spacecraft to the toe of the footprint· Here the error in the approximation in Eq. (7-2b) is proportional to 1-(WFlsin WF)t and is generally small relative
to other errors. Thus, Eq. (7-2b) is adequate for most pral;tical applications.
Fmally, if we assume that the projection on the ground is an ellipse, then the foot.
.
print area, .& ' is given by

.&

=(1t/4)LF WF

Ground 1lack

(7-3)

Assuming that LFwas computed by Eq. (7-1a), the error in ignoring the curvature of
the Earth in Eq. (7-3) is again proportional to 1 - (WF I sin WF) and is negligible for
most applications.
.
The instantaneous area coverage rate for the beam is defined by

ACRinstantaneous

9.& IT

(7-4)

where T is the exposure time or dwell time for the instrument The average area
coverage rate, ACRavtr will also be a function of the duty cycle, DC, which is the
fraction of the total time that the instrument is operating, and the average overlap
between the footprint, Oavg' which is the amount by which two successiv.e footprints
cover the same area (typiciilly about 20%):

ACR""g

(7-5)

• In the case of a noncircuIar beam, Eq. (7-1) can be used with the beam width, 8, perpendicular
to the horizon and Eq. (7-2) can be used independently with the beam width parallel to the
horizon.
t Here WF should be expressed in radians as seen from the center of the Earth.

Ag.7-3.

Typical Access Areas for Spacecraft Instruments. See Table 7-2 for formulas.

For instruments with an access pattern as shown in Fig. 7-3A, the instantaneous
access area, fAA, will be just the area of the small circle, that is,
.
fAA

=KA (1- cos A)

KA

= 21t .. 6.283185311

(7-6)

where

KA = 20,626.480 6

KA
KA

= 2.556041 87 x lOS
= 7.452225 69 x 107

for area in steradians
for area in deg2
for area in kJn2
for area in nmi2

168

Orbit and CoDStellation Design

7.2

169

Earth Coverage

7.2

The instantaneous access areas or access lengths for the other patterns in Fig. 7-3

are given in Table 7-2, which also summarizes all of the coverage formulas for these
patterns. These access area formulas do take into account the curved surface of the
Barth and are accurate for any access area size or satellite altitude to within very small
corrections for the Barth's oblateness.
TABLE 7-2. Coverage Formulas for Patterns Shown In Fig. 7-3. See text for definition of
variables. In pattern 0, the minus Sign appDes If .1.2 is on the same side of the ground
track as .1. r The approximation for footprint area is InvaRd when E=0. The ACR
formulas for patterns CandO assume thet the Instrument is side-looking. P is the
orbit period.

Pattern
A

B

Typical
Appllcation

Footprint
Area (FA)

Instantaneous
Access Area
(/AA) or
Length (/AL)

Omnlantenna,
Ground
statloncov,
General
sensing

(nDKL/4) IAA = KA(1-cos.1.)
sin 8x
(A.FO -.1.F/)
",(nD2/4) x
sln 2 8/sln£

Radar

As above

IAA = KA (cos ~

Area
Coverage
Rate (ACR)

I5i (1 - Oavg)OC

Area
Access
Rate(AAR)
~

T

sln.1.
P
Fig. 7-4.

As above

-cos~)

2KA sin.1.l
p

Earth Coverege Geometry. Ais the off ground track angle and 2 A.maxls the swath
width. P is the target or ground station.

where
cos AV= cos ~cos A

C

Synthetic
Aperture
Radar

As above

0

Scanning
Sensor

As above

IAL =2 KL (.1.l-~) ~ ( slnA., - slnA.p)
",2KL D sin. 8/ sin £
p

2KA ( s/nA., - slnA.p)
P

Therefore the time in view, T, for the point P will be
T- PF

IAL = KL (.1.1

±~)

KA (slnA., ± slnA.p)
p

~ ( slnA., ± sinA.p)
p

We now wish to determine the length of time a particular point on the Barth is
within the satellite access area and the access area rate at which the land enters or
leaves the access area. Consider a satellite in a circular orbit at altitude H. The orbit
period, P, in minutes is given by
P = 1.658 669 x 10-4 x (6,378.14 + 11)3/2
P

=4.180 432 x 1Q-4 x (3,443.9 + 11) 3/2

Hinkm

(7-7)

Hinnmi

We define the maximum Earth central angle, ~ as the radius of the access area
for the observation in question. Twice ~ is called the swath width and is the width
of the coverage path across the Earth. As shown in Fig. 7-4, the coverage for any point
P on the surface of the Earth will be a function of ~ and of the off-track angle, il,
which is the perpendicular distance from P to the satellite ground track for the orbit
pass being evaluated. The fraction of the orbit, Fview , over which the point P is in view
is
Fview

= Av/180deg,

(7-Sa)

(7-8b)

-

-

view -

P ) cos _1(COSAmax)
--( 180 deg
COSA.

(7-9)

which is equivalent to Eq. (5-49). Note that here we use A. rather than.A."w, for the off
ground-track angle and that AV is one half of the true anomaly range (I.e., angle alo~g
the ground track) over which the point P is in view by the satellite. See Fig. 5-17 In
Sec. 5.3.1 for the geometry of this computation.
Fmally, the area access rate as the satellite sweeps over the ground for the access
area of Fig. 7-3A is
AAR

=(2 KA sin )')IP

(pattemA)

(7-10)

Formulas for other patterns are in Table 7-2. A~ain note that beca~ of the curvature of the. Barth's surface, this area access rate IS not equal to the diameter of the
access area times the subsatellite point velocity.
As an example of the above computations, consider a spacecraft at 2,000 km
altitude with a 1 deg diameter beam staring perpendic~ar to ~e ground track at
elevation angle of 10 deg as seen from the ground. Our lInear estimate of the footpnnt
height is 446 km from Eq. (7-lb).* However, from Table 7-2 we see that the true height
is 355 km and therefore need to use the somewhat more complex Eq. (7-1a). From

:m

• As indicated previously, this estimaIe would be substantially improved if the 10 deg elevation

angle was at the cenler of the beam. However, we would then need to keep track of beamcenter parameters for the geometry and beam-edge parameters for performance estimates.

170

Orbit and CoDStellation Design

7.2

Eqs. (5-24), (5-26), and (5-27) we determine AFO = 31.43 deg and AF1= 28.24 deg. The
footprint width from Eq. (7-2a) is 77 km. From Eq. (7-3) the footprint area is 21,470
2
km • The accuracy of the area is proportional to 1 - (77/6;378) I sin (77/6,378) =
0.002%. The ground track velocity is the circumferenCe of the Earth divided by the orbit period (from Eq. 7-7) =40,075 kml127 min =315.6 kmlmin =5.26km1s. Multiplying this by the footprint height of 355 km gives a crude estimate of the area
coverage rate of 1,867 km2/s. Using the more accurate formula in Table 7-2 (Pattern
D) and the values of A above, we obtain a more accurate value of ACR = 2.556 x lOS
x (sin 31.43 deg - sin 28.24 deg) I (127 x 60) =1,620 km2/s which implies aD error of
15% in the less accurate approximation.
.
The above formulas are in terms of off-ground-track angle, which is computationally convenient. But we often need to know the coverage as a function of latitude, Lat,
for a satellite in a circular orbit at inclination, i. We assume that the pattern'of
Fig. 7-3A applies and that observations can be made at any off-track angle less than or
equal to ~ on either side of the satellite ground track. We also assume that Lat is
positive, that is, in the northern hemisphere. (The extensions are straightforward for
the southern hemisphere or nonsymmetric observations.) Depending on the latitude,
there will be either no coverage, a single long region of coverage, or two shorter
regions of coverage for each orbit as follows (See Fig. 7-5).

One coverage region

Grotmd lIace

__-I-~~"" 1Wo coverage region

FIg. 7-5.

Single Orbit Coverage Is a Function of Latitude, Orbit Inclination, and Swath
WIdth. See text for formulas.

Numberbf
Coverage Regions

Latitude Range
Lat>~+i

i+~>Lat>i-~
i-~>Lat>O

o

Percent
Coverage

o

1

2

thl180
(th

-~1180

(7-11a)
(7-11b)
(7-11c)

where
costlt..

"lor2

= ±sin~ +cosisinLat
sinicosLat

(7-12)

Earth Coverage

7.2

171

where the minus sign applies for tPl and the plus sign for tP-z. Here tP is one-half the
, longitude range over which coverage occurs. The formula in the third column above
represents the fraction of all points at a given latitude in view of the satellite during
one orbit. This is approximately equal to the fraction of orbits that will cover a given
point at that latitude.
As an example of the above formula, consider a satellite in a 62.5-deg inclined orbit
which can see to an off-ground-track angle, ~ =20 deg. At a ground station latitude
of 50 deg, the percent coverage will be 49.3%. On any orbit. 49% of the points at a
latitude of 50 deg will be within view of the satellite at some time. Conversely, a given
covered at some time oJ? approximately 49~ of tI;te
point at 50-~eg latitude will
satellite orbits. Because there IS only one coverage regIOn, the covered orbits will
occur successively during the day. If the satellite orbit period is 2 hr, then our
hypothetical ground station at 5O-deg latitude will typically see the satellite. on 6
successive orbits followed by 6 orbits of no coverage. The number and duration of
coverage passes on a given day will depend on where the ground station is located with
respect to the orbit node.
As a final example, consider a satellite in a I,OOO-km circular orbit at an inclination
of 55 deg. From Eq. (5-24), in Sec. 5.2, P = 59.82 deg and from Eq. (7-7) the orbit
period is 105 min. We assume that the satellite can makeobserva~ons out to ~ spacecraft elevation angle of 10 deg as seen by the target, corresponding to a nadir angle
1]
= 58.36 deg from Eq. (5-26) and maximum off~track angle, ~ = 21.64 deg
~ Eq. (5-27). From Eq. (7-10), the potential area search rate is 1.8 x 1()6 km2/min.
From Eq. (7-9) a point 15 deg from the ground track will remain in view for 9.2 min.
Fmally, from Eqs. (7-11), a satellite in such an orbit will see 45.7% of all points at a
latitude of 50 deg and 33.4% of all points at a latitude of 20 deg.

tx:

7.2.2 Numerical Simulations
The analytic formulas above provide an easy and rapid way to evaluate Earth
coverage, but this approach has several limitations. It does not take into account D?ncircular orbits, the rotation of the Earth under the spacecraft. or possible overlappmg
coverage of several satellites. Although we could extend the analytic e~!ons,
numerically simulating the coverage is a better approach for more complex SituatiOns.
Any modem office computer can do a simple simulation that takes these effects into
account with sufficient accuracy for preliminary mission analysis.
Analytic approximations also do not allow us to assess coverage statistics easily.
For example, while we can determine the coverage time for a given orbit pass, we
cannot easily compute how often we will see a given point or where regions of coverage or gaps between coverage will occur. We usually need these statistics for Earth
observation applications.
Numerical simulations of coverage can become extremely complex. They may
consider such activities as scheduling, power and, eclipse conditions, and observability
of the target or ground station. Chapter 3 briefly describes an example. In the following paragraphs we will consider two simple simulations of considerable use during
preliminary mission design.
The simplest "simulation" is a ground track plot of the mission geometry, clearly
revealing how the coverage works and the possible coverage extremes. Figure 7-6
shows ground trace plots for our example satellite in a 1,0000km circular orbit with a
period p = 105 min, cOrresponding to approximately 14 orbits per day. The longitude
spacing, AL, between successive node crossings on the equator is

172

Orbit and ConsteDation Design

P
IlL = 1.436min ·360deg

7.2

(7-13)

The heavy circle on· Fig. 7-6 represents the subsatellite points corresponding to
spacecraft elevations, £, greater than 5 deg (equivalent to Amax < 25.6 deg). For the
25-deg latitude shown, we can see by inspection that we will see the point P on either
two or three successive upward passes and two or three successive downward passes.
The downward coverage passes will normally begin on the fourth orbit after the last
upward coverage pass. Individual passes within a group will be centered approximately 105 min apart and will be up to 105 X 51.2/360 = 14.9 min long.

Fig. 7-6. Ground Track of 8 Successive Orbits (out of 14 per day) for a Satellite at
1,000 kin. The heavy circle covelS subsatellite points over which spacecraft wDl be at
an elevation angle, to greater than 5 deg. See text for discussion.

The details of each day's potential observations will depend on how the orbit falls
relative to the point P. However, the general flow will be as follows. Two or three
passes of approximately 12 min each will occur 105 min apart. (Twelve minutes is
estimated by inspection relative to the maximum pass duration of 15 min.) After a
break of 5 hr, there will be another group of 2 or 3 passes. The process will repeat after
a break of 12 hr. Though we would like to have more statistical data, the ground track
analysis can rapidly assess performance, represent the coverage distribution, and
crosscheck more detailed results. From this process we could, for example, generate
timelines for the most and least coverage in one day.
The next step in the numerical modeling hierarchy is a point coverage simulation.
To do this, we conceptually create a grid of points on the surface of the Earth, fly one
or more spacecraft over the grid, and track the observation characteristics for each of
the grid points. We can then collect and evaluate data over different geographical
regions. The most common way is to collect data along lines of constant latitude and
present statistical coverage results as a function of latitude. This type of simulation is
an excellent way to evaluate coverage statistically. The main disadvantage is that it

Earth Coverage

173

does not let us see the problem physically or admit the general analytic studies
stemming from the formulas of Sec. 7.2.1. Thus, the best choice is to evaluate coverage by combining analytic formulas, ground trace plots, and numerical simulations.
Although the technique for the numerical point coverage simulation is straightforward, the analyst must be aware of three potential pitfalls. Frrst, if we want to
compare coverage performance at different latitudes, then we need to have grid points
covering approximately equal areas over the surface of the globe. If grid points are at
equal intervals of latitude and longitude, (at every 10 deg, for example), then the
number of points per unit area will be much greater near the poles, thus incorrectly
weighting polar data in the overall global statistics. We can easily resolve this artificial
weighting by using grid points at a constant latitude spacing with the number of points
at each latitude proportional to the cosine of that latitude. This covers the globe with
an approximately equal number of points per unit area and properly balances the
global statistics.
Our second problem is to adjust for gaps where the simulation begins and ends.
Otherwise, these gaps will make gap statistics unrealistic because true gaps and
coverage regions will not begin and end at the start and end points of the simulation.
The easiest solution is to run the simulation long enough that start and end data have
minimal impact on the statistics.
The third, and perhaps most significant, problem is that we are trying to collect
statistical data on a process for which statistical distributions do not apply. Most
statistical measures, such as the mean, standard deviation, or the 90th percentile
assume that the data being sampled has a Gaussian or random distribution. While the
distribution which we found by examining the ground track plot above was not
uniform. it was also not at all important for some activities. Our estimation of above 2
to 3 passes of 12 min each, twice per day, gives an average percent coverage on the
order of 1 hr/24 hr = 4%. But just collecting statistical data and concluding that the
percent coverage is about 4% is remarkably unifonnative. That could be the result of
1 hr of continuous coverage and 23 hr of no coverage or 2.5 min of coverage every
hour. Similar problems plague all of the nonnal statistical measures applied to orbit
analysis. The important point is:

Statistical analysis ofinherently nonstatistical data, such as orbit
coverage, can lead to dramatically incorrect conclusions.
Simple techniques such as ground track analysis are imperative to understand and
validate the conclusions we reach.
7.2.3 Coverage Figures of Merit
Having established a simulation technique, we need to find a way to accumulate
coverage statistics and to evaluate the quality of coverage. As described in Chap. 3, we
can quantify coverage quality by providing a coverage Figure of Merit (an appropriate numerical mechanism for comparing the coverage of satellites and constellations). We wish to fmd a Figure of Merit which is physically meaningful, easy to
compute in our numerical simulation, and fair in comparing alternative constellations.
The most common general purpose coverage Figures of Merit are:

• Percent Coverage
The percent cOverage for any point on the grid is simply the number of times
that point was covered by one or more satellites divided by the total number

174

Orbit ~d CoDStellation Design

7.2

Earth Coverage

73

of simulation time steps. It is numerically equal to the analytically computed
percent coverage in Eq. (7-11). The advantage of percent coverage is that it
shows directly how much of the time a given point or region on the ground is
covered. However, it does not provide any information about the distribution
of gaps in that coverage.

• Maximum Coverage Gap (= Maximum Response Time)
The 17lOXimum coverage gap is simply the longest of the covemge gaps
encountered for an individual point When looking at statistics over more than
one point, we can either average the maximum gaps or take their maximum
value. ThuS the worldwide mean maximum gap would be the average value of
the maximum gap for all the individual points, and the worldwide maximum
gap would be the largest of any of the individual gaps. This statistic conveys
some worst-case information, but it incorrectly ranks constellations because a
single point or a small number of points determine the results. Thus. the
maximum coverage gap, or maximum response time, is a poor Figure of Merit
• Mean Coverage Gap
The mean coverage gap is the average length of breaks in covemge for a given
point on the simulation grid. To compute gap statistics, we must have three
counters for each point on the simulation grid. One counter tmcks the number
of gaps. A second tmcks total gap duration. The third tmcks the duration of the
current gap and is reset as needed. During the simulation, if no satellite covers
a given point on the grid, we increment the gap length counter (3) by one time
step. If the point is covered but was not covered the previous time (indicated
by a value of the gap length counter greater than 0), then we have reached the
end of an individual gap. We increment the counter for the number of gaps (1)
by one and add the gap duration to the total gap counter (2) or incorporate it
in other statistics we want to collect The final mean covemge gap is computed
by dividing the total gap length by the number of gaps. As noted above, what
happens at the beginning and end of the simulation influences all statistics
relating to gap distribution.
• Time Average Gap
The time average gap is the mean gap duration averaged over time. Alternatively, it is the average length of the gap we would find if we mndomly
sampled the system. To compute the time average gap, two counters are
required--one for the current gap length and one for the sum of the squares of
gap lengths. During the simulation, if no satellite covers a given point on the
grid, add one to the current gap length counter. If the point is covered, square
the current gap length, add the results to the sum of the squares counter, and
reset the current gap length counter to zero. (If the current gap length counter
was previously 0, then no change will have occurred in either counter.) The
time avemge gap is computed at the end of the simulation by dividing the sum
of the squares of the gaps by the duration of the simulation.
• Mean Response Time
The mean response time is the average time from when we receive a mndom
request to observe a point until we can observe it If a satellite is within view

175

of the point at a given time step, the response time at that step will be O.*If the
point in question is in a coverage gap, then the response time would be the
time until the end of the coverage gap. In principle, response time should be
computed from a given time step to the end of a gap. But by symmetry we
could also count the time from the beginning of the gap--a computationally
convenient method with the same results. Thus the response time counter will
be set to 0 if a point is covered at the current time step. We advanCe the
response time counter by one time step if the point is not now covered.
mean response time will then be the average value of all response times for all
time steps. This Figure of Merit takes into account both coverage and gap
statistics in trying to determine the whole system's responsiveness. As shown
below, the mean response time is the best coverage Figure of Merit for
evaluating overall responsiveness.

The

To illustmte the meaning and relative advantages of these Figures of Merit, Fig. 7-7
diagrams a simplified coverage simulation from three satellite systems: A, B, and C.
These could, for example, be three sample FrreSat constellations. Our goal is to see
events as quickly as possible, and therefore, minimize gaps. Constellation B is
identical to A except for one added gap, which makes B clearly a worse solution than
A. C has the same overall percent coverage as A, but the gaps are redistributed to
create a mther long gap, making C the worst constellation for regular covemge.

A

Best

B

Second

c

Worst

Time
Percent

Maximum

Coverage

Gap

Mean
Gap

Average Gap

Mean
Response TIme

A

60

2

1.33

0.6

0.5

B

50

2

1.25

0.7

0.6

C

60

3

2.00

1.0

0.7

Time

FIg. 7-7. Coverage Rgures of Merit. See text for explanation.
• One advantage of response time as a Figure of Merit is that delays in processing or communications (for both data requests and responses) can be directly added to the coverage response
time. This results in a total response time, which measures the total time from when users
request data until they receive it We can also evaluate minimum, mean, and maximum total
response times which have much more operational meaning than simple gap statistics but 8fe
stiII easy to compute.

176

Orbit and Constellation Design

7.3

The table below Fig. 7-7 shows the numerical v~ues of the Figures ofM;mt defined
above. The percent coverage correctly ranks constellation A better than B, but because
it does not take gap statistics into account it cannot distinguish between A and C.
Similarly, the maximum gap cannot distinguish between A and B, even though B is
clearly worse by having an additional gap. In this.case the maximum gap tells us which
constellation is worst but cannot distinguish between two constellations which are
clearly different
The ~an gap statistic is even more misleading. By adding a short gap to constellation B, the ~verage length of the gaps has been decreased, and consequently, this.
Figure of Ment ranks constellation B above constellation A. (This can happen in rea]
constellation statistics. By adding satellites we may eliminate some of the very small
gaps, thus increasing the average gap length, even though more satellites provide
more and better coverage.)
Fmally, the time average gap and ~an response time in the fourth and fifth
columns correctly rank the three constellations in order of preference by taking into
account both the percent coverage and gap statistics. Consequently, both of these are
better Figures of Merit than the other three. I believe the mean response time is the
stronger Figure of Merit because it provides a more useful measure of the end performance of the system and because it can be easily extended to include delays due to
processing, communications, decision making, or the initiation of action. However,
because each of the Figures of Merit represent different characteristics we should
evaluate more than one. Specifically, I recommend evaluating mean response time,
percent coverage, and maximum gap, and qualitatively (not quantitatively) weighting
the results in that order, keeping strongly in mind the caveat at the end of Sec. 7.2.2.

The AV Budget

7.3

177

mass which is a small fraction of the total mass. If the total 6.V required is equal to the
exhaust velocity, then we will need a total propellant mass equal to e -I"" 1.7 times
the mass of the spacecraft. Propulsion systems require additional structure such as
tanks, so a 6.V much greater than the exhaust velocity is difficn1t to achieve. It may
scuttle the mission or require some alternative, such as staging or refueling.
~able 7-3 s~ how to construct a 6.V budget We begin by writing down the
bastc data requrred to compute 6.Vs: the launch vehicle's initial conditions, the mission
orbit or orbits, the mission duiation, required orbit maneuvers or maintenance and the
mechanism for spacecraft disposal. We then transform each item into an equiv~ent 6.V
requirement using the formulas listed in the table. The right-hand column shows how
these formulas apply to the FrreSat mission. Figure 7-8 shows the 6.V required for
altitude maintenance for typical spacecraft and atmosphere parameters.

7.3 The AV Budget,
T~ an orbit designer, a ~pace mission is a series of different orbits. For example, a
satellIte may be released m a low-Earth parking orbit, transferred to some mission
orbit, go through a series of rephasings or alternative mission orbits, and then move to
some final orbit at the end of its useful life. Each of these orbit changes requires
energy. The 6.V budget is traditionally used to account for this energy. It is the sum of
the velocity changes required throughout the space mission life. In a broad sense the
6. V budget represents the cost for each mission orbit scenario. In designing orbits and
constellations, we must balance this cost against the utility achieved.
Chapter 10 shows how to develop Ii propulsion budget based on a given 6.V budget
For preliminary design, we can estimate the "cost" of the space mission by using the
rocket equation to determine the total required spacecraft plus propellant mass, '!'i.e
TTl() + mp' in terms of the dry mass of the spacecraft, mo, the total required 6.V, and the
propellant exhaust velocity, Yo:

10~L---~____L -_ _- L____L-__- L____L-~-=~__~L-

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

90o.

__~
1.000

Altitude (Ion)
Ag.7-8.

Altitude Maintenance AVS for a Ballistic Coefficient of 100 kg/m2. See Sec. 8.1.3
for ballistic coefficient and atmosphere parameters. The AV for altitude maintenance Is
inversely proportional to the baIIIs1ic coefficient. The F10.7 Index Is In units of 10-22
W/(m2·Hz). Ap Is an index of geomagnetic activity ranging from 0 (very quiet) to 400
(extremely disturbed).

(7-14)
This is equi~al~t to Eqs. (17-6) and (17:7) in Sec. 17.~, with replaced by Ispg,
where the specific unpulse, Isp:; Vo Ig, and g IS the acceleration of gravity at the Earth's
surface. Typical exhaust velocities are in the range of 2 to 4 kmls and up to 30 kmls
for electric propulsion. We can see from Eq. (7-14) that 6.V requirements much smaller
than the exhaust velocity (a few hundred meters per second), will require a piopellant

Vo

The 6.V budget relates strongly to the propulsion requirements and to the final cost
of a space ~ssion. Yet other conditions may vary the propellant requirements relative
to the Dommal 6.V budget For example, although rocket propulsion usually provides
the 6.V, w~ can obtain very large 6. Vs from a flyby of the Moon, other planets, or even
the Earth Itself [Kaufman, Newman, and Chromey, 1966; Meissinger, 1970]. In a flyby, a spacecraft leaves the vicinity of some celestial body with the same velocity

178

Orbit and CoDStellation Design

7.3

TABLE 7-3. Creating a AVBudget. See also summary tables on Ins/de back cover.
Item

Where

Equation

Discussed

Source

FlreSat Example

Basic Data
Initial Conditions

Chap. 18

150 km, 55 deg

MIssion Orbit(s)

Sees. 7.4, 7.5

700 km, 55 deg

Miss/on Durallon (each phase)

Sec. 2.3

Syr

Orbit Maintenance Requirements

Sees. 6.2.3. 6.5

Altitude maintenance

Drag Parameters

Sees.
6.2.3, 8.1.3

Table 8-3,
mlCdA = 25 kg/~ .
Fig. 8-2, Inside
13 kg/m3
p_=2.73x10rear enclleaf

Orbit Maneuver Requirements

Sec. 6.3

None

Anal Conditions

Sees. 6.5, 21.2

Positive reentry

Delta V Budget (m/s)

Orbit Transfer
1st bum
2nd bum
Altitude Maintenance (LEO)

Sec. 6.3.1*
Sec. 6.3.1*

(8-32). (6-39)

156m/s
153m/s

Sees. 6.2.3, 7.3 (6-26), Ag. 7-8 19m/s

North/South Statlonkeeplng (GEO) Sec. 6.5

(6-51), (8-52)

NlA

East/West Statlonkeeplng

Sec. 6.5

(6-53)

NlA

Orbit Maneuvers
Rephaslng, Rendezvous

Sec. 6.3.3

(6-41)

None

Node or Plane Change

Sec. 6.3.2

(6-38). (6-39)

None

Spacecraft Disposal

Sec. 6.5

(6-54)

198m/s

Sum of
the above

S26m/s

TotaJAV
Other Considerations
ACS & Other Requirements

Sec. 10.3

IN Savings

Sec. 7.3

MargIn

Sec. 10.2

See text
Included In propellant
budget

*Sec. 6.3.2 Hplane change also required.

relative to the body as when it approached, but in a different direction. This phenomenon is like the elastic collision between a baseball and a bat, in which the velocity of
the ball relative to the bat is nearly the same, but its velocity relative to the surrounding
baseball park can change dramatically. We can use flybys to change direction, to
provide increased heliocentric energy for solar system exploration, or to reduce the
amount of energy the satellite has in inertial space. For example. one of the most
energy-efficient ways to send a space probe near the Sun is to use a flyby of Jupiter to
reduce the intrinsic heliocentric orbital velocity of Earth associated with any spacecraft launched from Earth.

7.4

Selecting Orbits for Earth-Referenced Spacecraft

179

A second way to produce a large IJ.V without burning propellant is to use the
atmosphere of the Earth or other planets to change the spacecraft's direction or reduce
its energy relative to the planet. The manned flight program has used this method from
the beginning to dissipate spacecraft energy for return to the Earth's surface. Mars
Pathfinder used aerobraking for planetary exploration. It can also be used to produce
a major plane change through an aeroassist trajectory [Austin, Cruz, and French,
1982; Mease, 1988).
The solar sail is a third way to avoid using propellant. The large, lightweight sail
uses solar radiation to slowly push a satellite the way the wind pushes a sailboat Of
course, the low-pressure sunlight produces very low acceleration.
The aerospace literature discusses many alternatives for providing spaceflight
energy. But experimental techniques (those other than rocket propulsion and atmospheric braking) are risky and costly, so normal rocket propulsion will ordinarily be
used to develop the needed IJ.V, if this is at all feasible.
The IJ.V budget described in Table 7-3 measures the energy we must give to the
spacecraft's center of mass to meet mission conditions. When we transform this IJ.V
budget into a propellant budget (Chap. 10), we must consider other characteristics.
These include, for example, inefficiencies from thrusters misaligned with the IJ.V
direction, and any propulsion diverted from IJ.V to provide attitude control during orbit
maneuvers. Chapters 10 and 17 describe propulsion requirements in detail.
For most circumstances, the IJ.V budget does not include margin because it results
from astrodynamic equations with little error. Instead, we maintain the margin in the
propellant budget itself, where we can reflect such specific elements as residual
propellant. An exception is the use of IJ.V to overcome atmospheric drag. Here the IJ.V
depends upon the density of the atmosphere, which is both variable and difficult to
predict Consequently, we must either conservatively estimate the atmospheric density
or incorporate IJ.V margin for low-Earth satellites to c.ompensate for atmospheric
variations.

7.4 Selecting Orbits for Earth-Referenced Spacecraft
The fIrst step in finding the appropriate orbit for an Earth-referenced mission is to
determine if a specialized orbit from Table 7-4 applies.· We should examine each of
these orbits individually to see if its characteristics will meet the mission requirements
at reasonable cost. Space missions need not be in specialized orbits, but these orbits
have come into common use because of their valuable characteristics. Because they do
constrain such orbit parameters as altitude and inclination. we must determine whether
or not to use them before doing the more detailed design trades described below.
It is frequently the existence of specialized orbits which yields very different solutions for a given space mission problem. Thus, a geosynchronous orbit may provide
the best coverage characteristics, but may demand too much propellant, instrument
resolution, or power. This trade of value versus cost can lead to dramatically different
solutions, depending on mission needs. For a traditional communications system, the
value of providing continuous communicati~ns coverage outweighs the cost and
performance loss associated with the distance to geostationary orbit Some communications systems provide continuous coverage with·a low-Earth orbit constellation as
described in Sec. 7.6. In the case of FireSat, continuous coverage is not required and
• For an extended discussion see Cooley [19721 or Wertz [2001].

189

Orbit and Constellation Design

7.4

TABLE 7-4. Specialized Orbits Used for Earth-Referenced Missions. For nearly circular lowEarth orbits, the eccentricity will undergo a low-amplitude oscUlation. A frozen orbit
is one which has a smaH eccentricity (-0.001) which does not osciDate due to a
balancing of the J 2 and Ja perturbations.
Orbit

Geosynchronous
(GEO)

Characteristic

Application

Where Discussed

Communications,
weather

Sec. 6.1.4

Earth resources,
weather

Sec. 622

Mo/nlya

Apogee/perigee do not rotate High latitude
communications

Sec; 622

Frozen Orbit

Minimizes changes in orbit
parameters

See Chobotov [1996]

MaIntains nearly fixed
position over equator

Sun-synchronous Orbit rotates so as to
maintain approximately
constant orientation with
respect to Sun

Repeating Ground Subsatellite trace repeats
Track

Any orbit requiring
stable conditions

Any orbit where
Sec. 6.5
constant viewing
angles are desirable

the need for fme resolution on the .ground for an IR detection system precluded a
geosynchronous orbit, so its mission characteristics are dramatically different. There
is no a priori way of knowing how these trades will conclude, so we may need to carry
more than one orbit into detailed design trades. In any case, we should reconsider
specialized orbits from time to time to see whether or not their benefits are indeed
worth their added constraints.
Orbit design is inherently iterative. We must evaluate the effects of orbit trades on
the mission as a whole. In selecting the orbit, we need to evaluate a single satellite vs.
a constellation, specialized orbits, and the choice of altitude and inclination. For
example, alternative solutions to a communications problem include a single large
satellite in geosynchronous equatorial orbit and a constellation of small satellites in
low-Earth orbit at high inclination.
The first step in designing mission orbits is to determine the effect of orbit parameters on key mission requirements. Table 7-5 summarizes the mission requirements
that ordinarily affect the orbit. The table shows that altitude is the most important of
orbit design parameter.
The easiest way to begin the orbit trade process is by assuming a circular orbit and
then conducting altitude and inclination trades as described below and summarized in
the table. This process establishes a range of altitudes and inclinations, from which we
can select one or more alternatives. Documenting the reasons for these results is
particularly important, so we can revisit the trade from time to time as mission requirements and conditions change.
Selecting the mission orbit is often highly complex, involving such choices as
aVailability of launch vehicle, coverage, payload performance, communication links.
and any political or technical constraints or restrictions. Thus, considerable effort may
go into the process outlined in Table 7-1. Figure 3-1 in Sec. 3.23 shows the results of
the altitude trade for the FrreSat mission. Typically these trades do not result in
specific values for altitude or inclination, but a range of acceptable values and an
indication of those we would prefer. Ordinarily, low altitudes achieve better instru-

T

Selecting Orbits for Earth-Referenced Spacecraft

7.4

181

TABLE 7-5. Principal MissIon RequIrements That Normally Affect Earth-Referenced Orbit
Design.
MissIon RequIrement

Parameter Affected

Where Discussed

Coverage
Continuity
Frequency
Duration
Field of view (or swath width)
Ground track
Area coverage rate
Viewing angles
Earth locations of interest

Altitude
Sec. 72
Inclinetion
Node (only relevant for some orbits)
Eccentricity

Sensitivity or Performance
Exposure or dwell time
Resolution
Aperture

AItltude

Chaps. 9,13

environment and Survivability
Radiation environment
Ughting concfrtlons
Hostile action

AItltude
(Inclination usually secondary)

Chap. 8

Launch Capability
Launch cost
On-orbit weight
Launch site limitations

AItltude
Inclination

Chap. 18

Ground Communications
Ground station locations
Use of relay satellites
Data timeliness

Altitude
Inclinetion
Eccentricity

Chap. 13

AItltude
Eccentricity

Sees. 62.3, 8.1.5

AItltude
Inclination
Longitude in GEO

Sec. 21.1

Orbit Lifetime
Legal or Political Constraints
Treaties
Launch safety restrictions
International allocation

ment performance because they are closer to the Earth's surface. They also require
less energy to reach orbit. On the other hand, higher orbits have longer lifetimes and
provide better Earth coverage. Higher orbits are also more survivable for satellites
with military applications. Orbit selection factors usually compete with each other
with some factors favoring higher orbits and some lower.
Often, a key factor in altitude selection is the satellite's radiation environment As
described in Sec. 8.1, the radiation environment undergoes a substantial change at
approximately 1,000 kID. Below this altitude the atmosphere will quickly clear out
charged particles, so the radiation density is low. Above this altitude are the VanAllen
belts, whose high level of trapped radiation can greatly reduce the lifetime of
spacecraft components. Most mission orbits therefore separate naturally into either
low-Earth orbits (LEO), below 1,000 to 5,000 kID, and geosynchronous orbits (GEO),

182

Orbit and CoDSteDation Design

7.4

which are well above the Van AIlen belts. Mid-range altitudes may have coverage
characteristics which make them particularly valuable for some missions. However,
the additional shielding or reduced life stemming from this region's increased
mdiation environment also makes them more costly.
Having worked the problem assuming a circular orbit, we should also assess the
potential advantages of using eccentric orbits. These orbits have a greater peak altitude
for a given amount of energy, lower perigee than is possible with a circular orbit, and
lower velocity at apogee, which makes more time available there. Unfortunately,
eccentric orbits also give us non-uniform coverage and variable range and speed.
Eccentric orbits have an additional difficulty because the oblateness of the Earth
causes perturbations which make perigee rotate mpidly. This rotation leads to mpid
changes in the apogee's position relative to the Earth's surface. Thus, with most orbits,
we cannot maintain apogee for long over a given latitude. As Sec. 6.2 describes, the
first-order rotation of perigee is proportional to (2 - 2.5 sin2i) which equals zero at an
inclination, i =63.4 deg. At this critical inclination the perigee will not rotate, so we
can maintain both apogee and perigee over fixed latitudes. Because this orientation can
provide coverage at high northern latitudes, the Soviet Union has used such a Molniya
orbit for communications satellites for many years. Geosynchronous orbits do not
provide good coverage in high latitude regions.
Eccentric orbits help us sample either a range of altitudes or higher or lower
altitudes than would otherwise be possible. That is why scientific monitoring missions
often use high eccentricity orbits. As discussed in Sec. 7.6, Draim [1985, 1987a,
1987b] has done an extensive evaluation of the use of elliptical orbits and concluded
that they can have significant advantages in optimizing covemge and reducing the
number of satellites required.
FireSat Mission Orbit. Our first step for the FrreSat mission orbit is to look at the
appropriateness of the specialized orbits from Table 7-4. This is done for FrreSat in
Table 7-6. As is frequently the case, the results provide two distinct regimes. One possibility is a single geosynchronous FrreSat In this case, covemge of North America
will be continuous but covemge will not be available for most of the rest of the world.
Resolution will probably be the driving requirement
TABLE 7-&. FlreSat Specialized Orbit Trade. The conclusion Is that In low-Earth orbit we do
not need a specialized orbit for FlreSal Thti frozen orbit can be used with any of the
low-Earth orbit solutions.
Orbit
Geosynchronous

Advantages

Disadvantages

Good for
FlreSat

Continuous view of
continental U.S.

High energy requirement
Yes
No world-wide coverage
Coverage of Alaska not good

Sun-synchronous

None

High energy requirement

No

MoIniya

Good Alaska coverage
Acceptable view of
continental U.S.

High energy requirement
Strongly varying range

No, unless
Alaska Is

None

Yes

Frozen Orbit

Minimizes propellant usage

Repeating Ground Repeating viewing angle
Track
(marginal advantage)

critical

Restricts choice of altitude
Probably not
Some perturbations stronger

7.5

Selecting Transfer, Parking, and Space-Referenced Orbits

183

The alternative is a low-Earth orbit constellation. ResolUtion is less of a problem
than for geosynchronous. Coverage will not be continuous and will depend on the
number of satellites. None of the specialized low-Earth orbits is needed for FrreSat (A
frozen orbit can be used with essentially any low-Earth orbit) Thus, for the low-Earth
constellation option, there will be a broad tmde between· coverage, launchability,
altitude maintenance, and the mdiation environment
.
For low-Earth orbit, coverage will be the principal driving requirement. Figure 3-1
in Sec. 3.2.3 summarized the FrreSat altitude tmdes and resulted in selecting an altitude range of 600 to 800 km with a preliminary value of 700 Ian. This may be affected
by further coverage, weight, and launch selection tmdes. FrreSat will need to cover
high northern latitudes, but covemge of the polar regions is not needed. Therefore, we
select a preliminary inclination of 55 deg which will provide coverage to about 65 deg
latitude. This will be refined by later performance tmdes, but is not likely to change by
much.
Zero eccentricity should be selected unless there is a compelling reason to do
otherwise. There is not in this case, so the FrreSat orbit should be circular. Thus, the
preliminary FrreSat low-Earth orbit constellation has a 700 kID, i 55 deg, e 0,
and the number of satellites selected to meet minimum coverage requirements.

=

=

=

7.5 Selecting Transfer, Parking, and Space-Referenced Orbits
Selecting transfer, parking, and space-referenced orbits proceeds much the same as
for Earth-referenced orbits, although their chamcteristics will be different Table 7-7
summarizes the main requirements. We still look first at specialized orbits and then at
general orbit characteristics. Table 7-8 shows the most common specialized orbits.
The orbits described in this section may be either the end goal of the whole mission or
simply one portion, but the criteria for selection will be the same in either case.
TABLE 7-7. Principal Requirements that Normally Affect Design of Transfer, Parking, and
Space-Referenced Orbits.
Requirement

Where Discussed

Accessibility (A V required)

Sees. 6.3, 7.3

Orbit decay rate and long-term stability

Sec. 6.2.3

Ground station communications, especially for maneuvers

Sees. 5.3, 7.2

Radiation environment

Sec. 8.1

Thermal environment (Sun angle and eclipse constraints)

Sees. 5.1,10.3

AccessibOity by Shuttle or transfer vehicles

Sec. 18.2

..

7.5.1 Selecting a Transfer Orbit
A transfer orbit must get the spacecraft where it wants to be. For transfer orbits
early in the mission, the launch vehicle or a sepamte upper stage was tmditionally
tasked with doing the work as described in Chap. 18. Because of the continuing drive
to reduce cost, integml propulsion upper stages have become substantially more
common (see Chap. 17).

184

Orbit and Constellation Design

7.5

TABLE 7-11. Specialized Orbits Used for Transfer, Parking, or Space-Referenced Operations.
Orbit

Characteristic

Application

Section

Lunar or
Planetary Flyby

Same relative velocity
approaching and leaving
flyby body

Used to provide energy change
or plane change

Aeroass/st

Use atmosphere for plane
change or braking

Used for major energy savings for 7.3
plane change, altitude reduct/on
or reentry

Trajectory

Sun-syrichronous Orbit rotates so as to
maintain approximately
constant orientation with
respect to Sun
Lagrange Point
Orbit

Solar observations; missions
concerned about Sun
interference or uniform lighting

Maintains fixed position
Interplanetary monitoring;
relative to EarthlMoon
potential space manufacturing
system or Earth/Sun system

7.3

622

[Wertz,
2001)

Two distinct changes can occur during transfer orbit: a change in the total energy
of the satellite, and a change in direction without changing the total energy. As
discussed in Sec. 6.1, the total energy of a Keplerian orbit depends only on the semimajor axis. Consequently, only transfer orbits which change the mean altitude, such as
transfer from LEO to OEO, require adding energy to the satellite. Clearly, if we wish
to go to an orbit with a higher energy level then we must find some process to provide
the additional energy, such as rocket propulsion or a lunar or planetary flyby. If we
must remove energy from the orbit, we can frequently use atmospheric drag.
A change in satellite direction without changing energy normally involves a plane
change (inclination or node), although we may also change the eccentricity without
changing the mean altitude. (Any small thrust perpendicular to the velocity cannot
change the orbit energy, or therefore, the mean altitude.) To change the satellite orbit
plane or eccentricity without changing the total energy, several options are available.
If we choose to change directions· by using propulsion, then propellant requirements will typically be large; the !J.V required to change directions is directly
proportional to the spacecraft velocity, which is about 7 kmls in low-Earth orbit.
Fortunately, other techniques for changing the orbit plane require less energy. For
example, suppose we want to shift the node of an orbit to create a constellation with
nodes equally spaced around the Earth's equator or to replace a dead satellite. If the
constellation is at an altitude other than that of the replacement satellite, we can use
the node regression provided by normal orbit perturbations. The rate at which the node
of an orbit precesses varies substantially with altitude, as described in Sec. 6.2.
Specifically, if we have a final constellation at a high altitude, we cat! inject and leave
the replacement satellite at low altitude so that the node rotates differentially with
respect to the high-altitude constellation. When the satellite reaches the desired node,
an orbit transfer is made with no plane change, thus using much less energy. In this
case we are trading orbit transfer time for energy.
A second way to reduce the !J.V for large plane changes is to couple them with
altitude changes. The net required !J.V will be the vector sum of the two perpendicular
components changing the altitude and directioD-Substantially less than if the two
burns were done separately.
!

7.5

Selecting Transfer, Parking, and Space-Referenced Orbits

185

Because the !J.V required to change the plane is directly proportional to satellite
velocity, plane changes are easier at high altitudes where the satellite velocity is lower.
That is why most of the plane change in geosynchronous transfer orbit is done at
apogee rather than perigee.
.
If the required plane change is large, it may cost less total propellant to use a threeburn transfer rather than a two-burn transfer [Betts, 1977]. In this case, the first perigee
burn puts apogee at an altitude above the ultimate altitude goal, because the apogee
velocity is lower there; During a second burn, the plane change is made using a smaller
.1V and perigee is raised to the final altitude. The third bum then brings apogee back
to the desired end altitude. This process is not more efficient for small plane changes
such as those associated with launch from mid-latitudes to geosynchronous equatorial
orbit. A third proposed way to make large plane changes is the aeroassist orbit
described in Sec. 7.3 [Austin, Cruz, and French, 1982; Mease, 1988].
Ordinarily, we want to transfer a satellite using the smallest amount of energy,
which commonly leads to using a Hohmann transfer as described in Sec. 6.3. However, as illustrated in Fig. 7-9 and described in Table 7-9, other objectives may
inflqence the selection of a transfer orbit. For example, we can reduce the transfer time
relative to a Hohmann orbit by using additional energy. These transfers are not
common, but they may be appropriate if transfer time is critical as might be true for
military missions or a manned mission to Mars.

Fig. 7-9.

A. High Energy

B. Hohmann Transfer

c. Low Thrust Chemical

D. Electric Propulsion

Alternative Transfer Orbits. See Table 7-9 for characteristics.

We should also consider a low-thrust transfer, using low thrust chemical or
electrical propulsion. (See Chap. 17 for hardware information.) To do.a low-thrust
chemical transfer with maximum acceleration of 0.05 to 0.10 g's, the satellite undertakes a series of burns around perigee and then one or two bums at apogee to reach the

186

Orbit and Constellation Design

7.5

TABLE 7-9. AlternatIve Transfer Orbit Methods. (See Chap. 17 for discussions of hardware
alternatives.)
.
Method

Typical
Accel.

Orbit
Type

AV

Advantages

Disadvantages

High Energy 10g

BllptlcaJ& Table 6-5 • Rapid transfer
hyperbolic

• Uses more energy
than necessary +
Hohmann
disadvantages

Minimum
Energy,
High Thrust
(Hohmann)

Hohmann Eq. (6-32) • Traditional
transfer
• High efficiency
• Rapid transfer
• Low radiation
exposure

• Rough environment
• Thermal problems
• Can't use SIC
subsystems

Low Thrust
Chemical

1 t05 g

0.02 to
0.10 g

• FaDure
unrecoverable

Hohmann Same as • High efficiency
• Moderate radiation
transfer
Hohmann • Low engine weight
exposure
Segments
.3-4
day transfer to
• Low orbltdeploymant
GEO
&check-out
• Better failure
recovery
• Can use spacecraft
subsystems
• FaDure recovery
possible

Bectrlc
Propulsion

0.0001 to Spiral
0.001 g transfer

Eq. (6-37) • Can use very high Isp ·2to6month
transfer to GEO
engines = major
weight reduction
• High radiation
• Low orbit deployment exposure
and check·out
• Needs autonomous
transfer for cost
• Can have reusable
efficiency
transfer vehicle
• FaOure recovery
possible

final orbit, as illustrated in Fig 7-9C.1n this case the total efficiency will approximate
that of a two-bum Hohmann transfer, because all of the energy is being provided near
perigee or apogee, as it is for the Hohmann transfer. With a low-thrust chemical
transfer, we can deploy and check out a satellite in low-Earth orbit where we can still
recover it before transferring it to a high-energy orbit where we cannot. Low-thrust
transfer provides substantially lower acceleration and, therefore, a more benign
environment. Also, we are more likely to be able to recover a satellite if the propulsion
system fails. The principal disadvantage of low-thrust chemical transfer is that it is a
very nontraditional approach. Wertz, Mullikin, and Brodsky [1988] and Wertz [2001]
describe low-thrust chemical transfer further.
Another type of low-thrust transfer uses electric propulsion, with extremely low
acceleration levels-at levels of 0.001 g or less [Cornelisse, SchGyer, and Wakker,
1979}. Transfer therefore will take several months, even when the motors are thrusting
continuously. Consequently, as Fig. 7-9D shows, electric propulsion transfer requires

7.5

Selecting Transfer, Parking, and Space-Referenced Orbits

187

spiralling out, with increased total AV (see Table 7-9). We need far less total propellant
becaUse of electric propulsion's high I . Electric propulsion transfer greatly red~ces
the total on-orbit mass and, therefore, ilie launch cost. However, much of the weIght
savings is lost due to the very large power system required. In addition: t!te slo~
tranSfer will keep the satellite longer in the VanAllen belts, where radiation WIll
degrade the solar array and reduce mission life.
..
Flybys or gravity-assist trajectories can save much energy 1D orbIt tr~~ers.
Because they must employ a swing-by of some celestial object, however, mISSIOns
near Earth do not ordinarily use them. Gravity-assist missions can use the Earth, but
the satellite must first recede to a relatively high altitude and then come back near the
Earth.* For a more extended discussion of gravity-assist missions, see Kaufman,
Newman, and Chromey [1966], or Wertz [2001]. Meissinger et al. [1997, 1998) and
Farquhar and Dunham [1998] have separately propo~ interesting techniqu~ for
using a different orbit injection process to substantially mcrease the mass avallable
(and, therefore, reduce the launch cost) for high-energy interplanetary transfers.
FireSat Transfer Orbit. We assume that FireSat will be launched into a l50-km,
circular parking orbit at the proper inclination and need to determine .how to get to the
operational orbit of 700 km. For now, we assume some type of orbIt ~fer. When
the spacecraft weight becomes better known and. a .range of launch. vehicles selected,
another trade will be done to determine whether It IS more econorrucal for the launch
vehicle to put FireSat directly into its operational orbit.
The FireSat orbit transfer AV from Table 7-3 is a modest 309 mls. It is not worth
the added cost, solar array weight, or complexity for electric propulsion transfer. There
is no reason for a high-energy transfer. We are left to select betw~n a Ho~
transfer and a low-thrust chemical transfer. The Hohmann transfer IS the traditioDal
approach.
. . .
Low-thrust chemical transfer proVIdes a more berugn transfer envrronment and the
potential for low-orbit deployment and checko~t so that ~tellite recov~ would be a
possibility. The propulsion system would be hghter. we~ght and ~?ITe les~ control
authority. We may be able to do the orbit transfer usmgJust the miSSIon orbIt control
modes and hardware which could completely eliminate a whole set of components and
control logic.
.
For FireSat we will make a preliminary selection of low-thrust chemIcal transfer.
This is non-traditional, but probably substantially lower cost and lower risk. Later in
the mission design, the launch vehicle may eliminate this transfer orbit entirely.
7.5:2 Parking and Space-Referenced Orbits
In parking or space-referenced orbits, the position of the spacecraft relative to the
Earth is unimportant except for blockage of com~uni~ations or fields of v~ew. Here
the goal is simply to be in space to observe celestial objects, sample the enVlfOnment,
or use the vacuum or low-gravity of space. These orbits are used, for example, for
space manufacturing facilities, celestial observatories such as Space Telescope and
Chandra X-Ray Observatory, or for testing various space applications and processes.
Because we are not concerned with our orientation relative to the Earth, we select such
orbits to use minimum energy while maintaining the orbit altitude, and possibly, to
gain an unobstructed view of space. For example, Sun-synchronous orbits may be
·Using the Earth for a gravity assist was first proposed by Meissinger (1970).

188

Orbit and Constellation Design

7.6

appropriate for maintaining a constant Sun angle with respect to a satellite instrument
Another example is the parking or storage orbit a low-Earth orbit high enough to reduce atmospheric drag, but low enough to be easy to reach. We may store satellites
(referred to as on-orbit spares) in these orbits for later transfer to other altitudes.
An interesting class of orbits which have been used for environmental monitoring
and proposed for space manufacturing are libration point orbits or ·lAgrange orbits,
named after the 18th century mathematician and astronomer, Joseph Lagrange. The
lAgrange points for two celestial bodies in mutual revolution, such as the Earth and
Moon or Earth and Sun, are five points such that an object placed at one of them will
remain there indefinitely. We can place satellites in "orbit" around the Lagrange points
with relatively small amounts of energy required to maintain these orbits. (For more
details, see Wertz [2001].)

7.6 Constellation Design
In designing a constellation, we apply all of the criteria for designing a singlesatellite orbit. Thus, we need to consider whether each satellite is launchable,
survivable, and properly in view of ground stations or relay satellites. We also need to
consider the number of satellites, their relative positions, and how these positions
change with time. both in the course of an orbit and over the lifetime of the
constellation.
Specifying a constellation by defining all of the orbit elements for each satellite is
complex, inconvenient, and overwhelming in its range of options. A reasonable way
to begin is by looking at constellations with all satellites in circular orbits at a common
altitude and inclination, as discussed in Sec. 7.4. This means that the period, angular
velocity, and node rotation rate will be the same for all of the satellites. This leads to
a series of trades on altitude, inclination, and constellation pattern involving principally the number of satellites, coverage, launch cost, and the environment (primarily
drag and radiation). We then examine the potential of elliptical orbits and the addition
of an equatorial ring. The principal parameters that will need to be defined are listed
in Table7-10. After exploring the consequences of some of the choices, we will
summarize the orbit design process in Sec. 7.6.2. A more detailed discussion is given
in Wertz [2ool}.
No absolute rules exist. A constellation of satellites in randomly spaced low-Earth
orbits is a serious possibility for a survivable communications system. The Soviet
Union has used a constellation of satellites in highly eccentric Molniya orbits for
decades. Various other missions may find satellite clusters useful. One of the most
interesting characteristics of the low-Earth orbit communications constellations is that
the constellation builders have invested billions of dollars and arrived at distinctly
different solutions. For example, a higher altitude means fewer satellites, but a much
more severe radiation environment (as discussed in Sec. 8.1), such that the cost of each
satellite will be higher and the life potentially shorter. Similarly, elliptical orbits allow
an additional degree of freedom which allows the constellation to be optimized for
multiple factors, but requires a more complex satellite operating over a range of
altitudes and velocities and passing through heavy radiation regimes. (See, for
example, Draim [1985].) Because the constellation's size and structure strongly affect
a system's cost and performance, we must carefully assess alternate designs and document the reasons for final choices. It is this list of reasons that allows the constellation
design process to continue.

189

Constellation Design

7.6

TABLE 7-10. PrIncipal Factors to be DefIned During ConsteliaHon Design. See Sec. 7.6.2

for a summary of the constellation desIgn process.
Where

Factor

Effect

Selection Criteria

. Discussed

PRINCIPAL DESIGN VARIABLES
Number of Satellites

PrincIpal cost and
coverage driver

Constellation Pattem

Determines coverage vs. Select for best coverlatitude, plateaus
age

Sec. 7.6.1

Mmimum Elevation
Angle

Principal determinant of Minimum value conslssingle satellite coverage tent with constellation
pattern

Sees. 5.3.1,

AltitUde

Coverage, environment,
launch, & transfer cost

System level trade of
cost vs. performance

Sees. 7.2,7.6.1

MinImize consIstent

Sec. 7.6.1

Number of Orbit Planes DetermInes coverage
plateaus, growth and
degradation
Collision Avoidance
Parameters

Key to preventing
constellation selfdestruction

Inclination

Determines latitude
dIstribution of coverage

Minimize number
Sec. 7.6.1
consistent with meeting
other criteria

7.6.1

with coverage needs

Maximize the Intersatel- Sec. 7.6.2
lite dIstances at plane
crossings

SECONDARY DESIGN VARIABLES

Between Plane PhasIng Determines coverage
uniformity
Eccentricity

MIssIon complexity and
coverage vs. cost

Size of Stationkeeplng

Coverage overlap
needed; cross-track
pointing

Box
End-of-Life Strategy

Bimlnatlon of orbital
debris

Compare latitude cover- Sees. 7.2, 7.6.1
age vs. launch costs •
Sees. 7.6.1,
Select best coverage
among dIscrete phasing 7.62
options'

Normally zero; nonzero Sees. 7.4, 7.6.1
may reduce number of
satellites needed
MinImize consIstent

Wertz [2001]

with low-cost malnte-

nance approach
Any mechanIsm that
allows you to clean up
after yourself

Sec. 6.5

'Rne tune for comslon avoidance

7.6.1 Coverage and Constellation Structure
For most constellations, Earth coverage is the key reason for using multiple satellites.· A constellation can provide observations and communications more frequently
than a single satellite can. Given this objective, the normal trade in constellation design
is coverage as a measure of performance versus the number of satellites as a measure
of cost Thus, we normally assume that a five-satellite constellation will be less
• The principal alternative is the scientific satellite constellation which may, for example, want
to sample simultaneoUsly the magnetosphere and solar particle flux at various locations and
altitudes.

190

Orbit and Constellation Design

7.6

expensive than a six-satellite one, but this assumption may be wrong. The larger constellation may be at a lower altitude or inclination and, therefore, cost less to launch or
have a less harsh radiation environment. Alternatively, we may be able to have a
smaller constellation with elliptical orbits, for which increased spacecraft complexity
could offset the lower cost due to the number of satellites.
A Principal characteristic of any satellite constellation is the number oforbit planes
in which the satellites reside. Symmetry in constellation structure requires an equal
number of satellites in each orbit plane. This means that an eight-satellite constellation
may have either one, two, four, or eight separate orbit planes. But because JI!Oving
satellites between planes uses much more propellant than moving them within a plane,
it is highly advantageous to place more satellites in a smaller number of planes.
Moving satellites within an orbit plane requires only a slight change in the satellite
altitude. This changes the period so we can slowly rephase the satellite within the constellation, and then return it to the proper altitude to maintain its position relative to the
rest. Thus, we can rephase many times using relatively little propellant. If a satellite
fails or a new satellite is added to a given orbit plane, we can rephase the remaining
satellites so that they are uniformly spaced. The consequence of this is to provide a
significant premium to constellations which contain more satellites in a smaller
number of orbit planes.
The number of orbit planes relates strongly to a coverage issue often overlooked in
constellation design: the need to provide the constellation both performance plateaus
and graceful degradation. Ideally one would like to achieve some performance level
with the very first satellite launched and to raise that level of performance with each
succeeding satellite. Generally, however, performance tends to come in plateaus as we
put one more satellite into each orbit plane of the final constellation. If a constellation
has seven orbit planes, we will achieve some performance with the first satellite. but
the next major performance plateau may not come until one satellite is in each of the
seven planes. We would expect this constellation to have plateaus at one, seven, fourteen, twenty-one, (and so on) satellites. Again, constellations with a small number of
orbit planes have a distinct advantage over many-plane ones. A single-plane constellation produces performance plateaus with each added satellite, whereas one with two
planes would have plateaus at one, two, four, six, eight, (and so on) satellites. Thus,
more complex constellations will require more satellites for each performance plateau.
Frequent performance plateaus have several advantages. FU'Sl, because individual
satellites are extremely expensive, we may want to build and launch one or two
satellites to verify both the concept and the constellation's ultimate usefulness. If a
constellation is highly useful with just one or two satellites, it offers a major advantage
to the system developer.
Another advantage is that coverage requirements are rarely absolute. More coverage is better than less, but we may not know at the time the constellation is designed
how useful added coverage will be. For example, we may design the FireSat system
for 30-min revisits, then later revise the response strategy so 45-min revisits can
provide nearly equal performance. Communications constellations are normally
thought of as having a very rigid requirement of continuoUs global coverage. Even
here, however, they may want more coverage or greater redundancy over regions of
high population density.
A constellation of one or two planes can be more responsive to changing user needs
than a system with multiple planes can. Because we often design constellations many
years before many launch, we may not be able to correctly balance performance vs.

7.6

Constellation Design

191

cost. Both needs and budgets follow political constraints and economic priorities over
much shorter periods than a constellation's lifetime. Thus if an eight-satellite constellation is highly useful with only six satellites, budget constraints may delay the launch
of the remaining two.* At the same time, the constellation may expand to ten satellites
if the first set generates substantial demand for more performance or greater capacity.
This responsiveness to political and performance demands provides perhaRS the
largest advantage to constellations with a smaller number of orbit planes.
Fmally, a smaller number of orbit planes leads to more graceful degradation. In an
eight-satellite, two-plane constellation, if one satellite is lost for any reason. we may
rephase the constellation at little propellant cost and thereby maintain a high performance level corresponding to a six-satellite plateau. This rephasing and graceful
degradation may be impossible for constellations with a large number of orbit planes.
Another important characteristic is the orbit inclination. In principle, one could
design satellite constellations with many different inclinations to get the best coverage.
In practice this is extremely difficult because the rate of nodal regression for a satellite
orbit is a function of both altitude and inclination. Consequently, satellites at a
common altitude but different inclinations will regress at different rates, and a set of
orbit planes which initially have a ~ven geometric relationship with respect to each
other will change that relationship with time. Otherwise, we would have to expend
propellant to maintain the relative constellation spacing, a technique that is extremely
expensive in terms of propellant 3Qd is achievable for only a short time or under. unique
circumstances. Thus, we usually design constellations to have all the satellites at the
same inclination. A possible exception is to have all satellites at a single inclination
except for a set of satellites in a 0 inclination (equatorial) orbit. Regression of the
nodes is not meaningful for the equatorial orbit, so we can maintain constant relative
phasing indefinitely between satellites in equatorial and inclined orbits. An example
of such a constellation is satellites in three mutually peipendicular orbit planes---two
polar and one equatorial.
As shown in Fig. 7-10, the spacing between satellites in a single orbit plane
determines whether coverage in that plane is continuous and the width of the CODtinuous coverage region. Assume that ~ is the maximum Earth central angle as
defined in Sec. 5.3.1 and that there are N satellites equally spaced at S =360IN deg
apart in a given orbit plane. There is intermittent coverage throughout a swath of halfwidth Amar If S > 2 Amax. the coverage is intermittent throughout the entire swath. If
S < 2 Amax. there is a narrower swath, often called a street ofcoverage, centered on the
ground trace and of width 2 Astreep in which there is continuous coverage. This width
is given by:
cos Astreet =cos ~/cos (SI1:)

(7-15)

If the satellites in adjacent planes are going in the same direction. then the "bulge" in
one orbit can be used to offset the "dip"in the adjacent orbit as shown in Fig. 7-11. In
this case, the maximum perpendicular separation, D1TIQXO between the orbit planes
required for continuous coverage is

D1IIIUS =Astreet + ~

(moving in the same direction)

(7-16)

• One hopes that proCuring agencies will not purposely select a rigid alternative to protect
budgets.

192

, Orbit and ConsteDation Design

7.6

r
I

ConsteDation Design

7.6

"Bulge"

Seam

,
....

Street 01

\

,.......

Coverage

\

'\
............

-

Fig. 7-10.

,,
,
,,

The "Street of Coverage" Is a Swath Centered on the Ground Track for which
thera Is Continuous Coverage.

:,

-"'* - - - - - ;'.

,,

I

,"
I

Flg.7-12.

Fig. 7-11.

Coverage In Adjacent Planes. If the planes are moving in the same direction, the
overlap pattem can be designed to provide maximum spacing between adjacent
planes.

If the satellites are moving in opposite directions, then the bulge and dip cannot be
made to line up continuously and, therefore,
DmoxO= 2 Astreet

(moving opposite directions)

193

(7-17)

This leads to a polar constellation often called Streets of Coverage, illustrated in
Fig. 7-12, in which M planes of N satellites are used to provide continuous global
covemge. At any given time, satellites over half the world are going northward and satellites over the other half are going southward. Within both regions, the orbit planes
are separated by DmaxS • Between the two halves there is a seam in which the satellites
are going in opposite directions. Here the spacing between the planes must be reduced
to DmoxO in order to maintain continuous covemge.
This pattern clearly shows another critical characteristic of constellations----coverage does not vary continuously and smoothly with altitude. There are discrete

Seam

"Streets of Coverage" Constellation Pattern. View seen from the north pole.
Northward portions of each orbit are drawn as solid lines and southward portions are
dashed. To achieve full coverage, orbit planes on either side of the seam must be
closer together than the others.

jumps in covemge which depend primarily on "-max which, in tum, depends on the
minimum elevation angle, Emin' and the altitude (See Eqs. 5-35 and 5-36). If we keep
Emin fixed and lower the constellation altitude, then we will reach an altitude plateau
at which we will need to add another orbit plane, and N more satellites, to cover the
Earth. The Iridium communications constellation was originally intended to have 77
satellites in a streets of covemge pattern. (The element iridium has an atomic number
of77.) By slightly increasing the .a1titude and decreasing the minimum elevation angle,
the number of orbit planes was reduced by one, and the number of satellites required
for continuous covemge was reduced to only 66. (Unfortunately, dysprosium is not a
compelling constellation name.)
As the altitude changes, the fundamental constellation design changes and, consequently, the number of satellites and covemge characteristics change in steps. As a
result, we cannot provide a meaningful chart of, for example, number of satellites vs.
altitude without examining different constellation designs at different altitudes. While
we may use this sort of chart to estimate constellation size, it would not provide
realistic data for orbit design.
Requirements other than covemge can also be important in constellation design, but
most are directly related to covemge issues. For example, we may need several satellites to cover a point on the ground or in space at the same time. Navigation with GPS
requires that four satellites be in view with a reasonably large angular sepamtion. A
similar requirement is cross-link connectivity among satellites in the constellation.
Cross-link connectivity is geometrically the same issue as overlapping covemge. At
any time when the covemge of two satellites overlaps (that is, they can both see at least
one common point on the ground), then the two satellites can see each other and we
can establish a cross-link. Thus, forming cross-links is equivalent to the problem of
multiple covemge.
Even apparently simple design problems can be very difficult, with solutions
depending on various mission conditions. Perhaps the simplest constellation design
problem is the question "What is the minimum number of satellites required to provide

-r
194

Orbit and Constellation Design

7.6

continuous coverage of the EarthT' In the late 1960s, Easton and Brescia [1969] of the
United States Naval Research Laboratory analyzed coverage. by satellites in two
mutually perpendicular orbit planes and concluded we would need at least six satellites
to provide complete Earth coverage. In the 1970s, J.O. Walker [1971,1977,1984] at
the British Royal Aircraft Establishment expanded the types of constellations
considered to include additional circular orbits at a common altitude and inclination.
He concluded that continuous coverage of the Earth would require five satellites.
Because of his extensive work, Walker constellations are a common set of
constellations to evaluate for overall coverage. More recently in the 1980s, John
Draim [1985, 198730 1987b] found and patented a constellation of/our satellites in
elliptical orbits which would provide continuous Earth coverage. A minimum of four
satellites are required at anyone instant to provide full coverage of the Earth.
Consequently, while the above progression looks promising, the 1990s are unlikely to
yield a three-satellite full Earth coverage constellation or the 2000s a two-satellite
constellation.
While extensively studying regular, circular orbit patterns, Walker [1984]
developed a notation for labeling orbits that is commonly used in the orbit design
community and frequently used as a starting point for constellation design. Specifically, the Walker delta pattern contains a total of t satellites with s satellites evenly
distributed in each of p orbit planes. All of the orbit planes are assumed to be at the
same inclination, i, relative to a reference plane--typically the Earth's equator. (For
constellation design purposes, this need not be the case. But orbit perturbations depend
on the inclination relative to the equator and, therefore, the equator is the most practical standard reference plane.) Unlike the streets of coverage, the ascending nodes of
the p orbit planes in a Walker pattern are uniformly distributed around the equator at
intervals of 360 deglp. Within each orbit plane the s satellites are uniformly distributed
at intervals of 360 degls.
The only remaining issue is to specify the relative phase between the satellites in
adjacent orbit planes. To do this we define the phase difference, 11q" in a constellation
as the angle in the direction of motion from the ascending node to the nearest satellite
at a time when a satellite in the next most westerly plane is at its ascending node. In
order for all of the orbit planes to have the same relationship to each other, 11q, must be
an integral multiple,/, of 360 deglt, where/can be any integer from 0 to P - 1. So long
as this condition holds, each orbit will bear the same relationship to the next orbit in
the pattern. The pattern is fully specified by giving the inclination and the three
parameters, t, p, and f. UsualIy such a constellation will be written in the shorthand
notation of i: tlp/f. For example, Fig. 7-13 illustrates a Walker constellation of 151511
at i =65 deg. Table 7-11 gives the general rules for Walker delta pattern parameters.
While Walker constellations are important to constellation design, they are not the
only appropriate options and do not necesSarily provide the best characteristics for a
given mission. Walker intended to provide continuous multiple coverage of all the
Earth's surface with the smallest number of satellites. This plan may or may not meet
all the goals of a particular program. For example, equally distributed coverage over
the Earth's surface may not be the most beneficial. We may wish to provide global
coverage with the best coverage at the poles, mid-latitude regions, or the equator. In
these cases, we may want constellation types other than Walker orbits.
If the regions of interest do not include the poles, then an equatorial constellation
may provide all of the coverage with a single orbit plane, which leads to flexibility,
multiple performance plateaus, and graceful degradation. Thus, for example, if all of

Constellation Design

7.6

195

A 15/5/1 Walker ConsteDation at 65 deg IncDnation. Circles are centered on each
of the 15 sateUites. The double circle is on a satellite at its ascending node.

fig. 7-13.

TABLE 7-11. Characteristics of a Walker Delta Pattem Constellation. See Walker [1984].

TIPIF -

Walker Delta Patterns

t = Number of satellites.
p = Number of orbit planes evenly spaced In node.
f= Relative spacing between satellites in adjacent planes.
Define S

EJ

Vp = Number of satellites per plane (evenly spaced).

Define Pattem Unit. PU e 360 deglt.
Planes are spaced at Intervals of s PUS in node.
Satellites are spaced at intervals of p PUs within each plane.

If a satellite Is at its ascending node, the next most easterly satellite wiD be f PUS past the node.
f Is an integer which can take on any value from 0 to (p -1).
Example: 1515/1 constellation shown in Rg. 7-13.
15 sateDites In 5 planes (t= 15, p= 5).
3 satellites per plane (s e Vp = 3).
PU = 36OIt= 360115 =24deg.
In-plane spacing between satellites = PU x P = 24 x 5 = 120 deg.
Node spacing = PU x s = 24 x 3 = 72deg.
Phase difference between adjacent planes:: PUx f= 24 x 1 =24deg.

the regions of interest were within 50 deg of the equator, we would want to consider a
constellation having several equatorial satellites with enough altitude to provide the
appropriate coverage at the smallest spacecraft elevation angle.
If all or most regions of interest are above a given latitude, a directly polar constellation would allow all satellites to see the region of the pole on every orbit Thus, if all
targets of interest were within 50 deg of the pole, a polar conste11ation with a single
orbit plane could provide excellent coverage. If most targets were in the polar region

196

Orbit and Constellation Design

7.6

with lesser interest in the equatorial regions, a two-plane polar constellation could
provide continuous or nearly continuous coverage of the pole while providing reduced
but good coverage of the equatorial regiQns. One might also consider a mix of polar or
high inclination satellites with some satellites at the equator to provide the added
coverage needed there.
Another class of non-Wa1ker constellations consists of two planes at right angles to
each other. If both planes are perpendicular to the equator it will be a polar constellation. Although it will have substantial symmetry, it is not one of the Wa1ker delta
patterns. The two planes can also be tipped relative to the equator to achieve any
inclination from 90 to 45 deg. Again the ascending nodes are such that they are not
Wa1ker constellations except when the inclination is 45 deg, in which case they reduce
to a Walker two-plane configuration. Figure 7-14 shows examples of several nonWa1ker constellations.

A. 2-plane Polar

B. 3 Mutually Perpendicular Planes

7.6

Constellation Design

197

A final example of non-Wa1ker constellations is the Molniya orbits used for
Russian communication satellites. Sections 6.2 and 7.4 describe them in more detail.
As mentioned above, these constellations can fully cover high northern latitudes while
requiring much less energy than circular high-altitude orbits.
7.6.2 Summary of Constellation Design
Constellation design is complex, requiring us to assess many issues and orbit characteristics. We must certainly pick a preliminary design, but this complexity demands
that we document the reasons for that design and remain aware of alternatives as orbit
design continues. Unfortunately, systematic reassessments of constellation design are
difficult under typical budget constraints and the constellation pattern is often locked
in very early in mission design.
Unfortunately, we cannot use analytic formulas to design a constellation. With
numerical simulation, we can evaluate some of the Figures of Merit defined in
Sec. 7.2. (That section discusses how to layout the simulation for unbiased results.)
Generally the results of such a simulation are best expressed as Figures of Merit vs.
latitude for the various performance plateaus. Thus, a typical decision plot might
include mean response, percent coverage, and maximum gap as a function of latitude
for the various constellations being considered. Often, we must also evaluate coverage
data for different instruments on board a spacecraft. Each instrument has its own
coverage area and, therefore, a different swath width will apply for each principal
observation type. Thus, the coverage associated with one instrument may differ
dramatically from that associated with another instrument or operating mode. Alternative operating modes or instruments will likely lead us to prefer distinctly different
constellation designs. We may then choose either different satellites or a compromise
between the alternative instruments or modes.
Table 7-12 summarizes the constellation design process. Wertz 12001] provides a
much more extended discussion of constellation design and techniques for evaluating
the factors involved. Mora et al. [1997] provide an excellent chronological summary
of constellation design methods. As with single-satellite orbits, we normally start by
assuming circular orbits at a common altitude. Depending upon the coverage
requirements, I recommend beginning with either the Wa1ker delta orbits, the oneplane equatorial, or streets of coverage polar orbits. We should also consider elliptical
orbits, either as a full constellation or to fill in missing coverage. Generally, we
evaluate each constellation design for three criteria:
• Baseline Coverage vs. lAtitude
The coverage associated with different instruments or operating modes is best
expressed as coverage vs. latitude (see Sees. 7.2.2 and 7.2.3). I regard the mean
response time as the best overall measure of coverage, although percent
coverage and maximum gap can also be important in some applications. We
must use the maximum gap measure carefully because this single point should
not be allowed to drive the design of an entire constellation as it will typically
not provide the best overall performance for the cost.

C. 2 Perpendicular Non-polar Planes
Fig. 7-14.

D. 5-plane Polar "Streets of Coverage"

Examples of Typical Non-Walker Constellations. All orbits are assumed to be

circular.

• Growth and Degradation
As described in See. 7.6.1, this is a key issue in practical constellation design.
It will be different for each constellation type. In evaluating growth and degradation we should assume that rephasing within the orbit plane can be done at
very modest propellant cost, and that changing orbit planes is not feasible.

198

Orbit and Constellation Design

7.6

TABLE 7-12. Constellation Design Summary. See text for discussion. See also Tables 7-11,
7-14, and 7-15 for additional detaDs.

Step
1. Establish mission requirements, particularly
• Latltude-dependent coverage
• Goals for growth and degradation plateaus
• Requirements for different modes or sensors
• Umits on system cost or number of sateDItes
2. Do all single satellite trades except coverage
3. Do trades between swath width (or maximum Earth central
angle), coverage, and number of satellites.
• Evaluate candidate constellations for:
- Coverage Rgures of Merit vs. latitude
- Coverage excess
- Growth and degradation
- Altitude plateaus
- End-of-life options
• Consider the following orbit types
- Walker Delta pattern
- Streets of coverage polar constellation with seam
- Equatorial
- Equatorial supplement
- Bliptical
4. Evaluate ground track plots for potential coverage holes or
methods to reduce number of satellites.
5. Adjust Inclination and in-plane phasing to maximize the
Intersatelite distances at plane crossings for collision
avoidance.
6. Review the rules of constellation design In Table 7-13.
7. Document reasons for choices and iterate.

Where Discussed
Chap. 5
Sec. 7.2

Sec. 7.4
Sec. 7.6.1

1.6

Constellation Design

TABLE 7-13. Rules for ConstellaUon Design. WhUe there are no absolute rules, these broad
guidelines are appllca!Jle to most constellations.
Rule

Where
Discussed

1. To avoid differential node rotation, all satellites should be at the same
Inclination, except that an equatorial orbit can be added.

Sec. 6.2.2

2. To avoid perigee rotation, all eccentric orbits should be at the critical
inclination of 63.4 deg.

Sec. 6.2.2

3. Collision avoidance Is critical, even for dead satellites, and may be a
driving characteristic for constellation design.

Table 7-14

4. Symmetry Is an important, but not critical element of constellation
design.

Sec. 7.6.1

5. Altitude Is typlcaHy the most important of the orbit elements, followed by Sees. 7.4, 7.6.1
Inclination. Zero eccentricity Is the most common, although eccentric
orbits can improve some coverage and sampling characteristics.
6. Minimum working elevation angle (which determines swath width) Is as Sec. 5.2,
important as the altitude In determlng coverage.
Rg.5-21

Sec. 7.1
[Wel1z,2OO1)

Table 7-13

• Existence ofAltitude Plateaus
We should evaluate each constellation to see if plateaus exist in which the
number of orbit planes or other key characteristics make a discrete step. Plateaus may be different for different instruments and operating modes, but usually are functions of the swath width for each instrument or operating mode.
There are no absolute rules for choosing the proper constellation. Selection is based
on the relative importance of the various factors to the owners and users of the
constellation. A summary of the most common rules and the reason for them is given
in Table 7-13. As with all aspects of mission design, we must document our selection,
our reasons, and the coverage characteristics. It is critical to keep in mind possible
alternatives and to reevaluate orbits with advances. in mission definition and
requirementS.
Finally, one of the most important characteristics of any constellation is collision
avoidance. The reason for this is not merely the loss of the satellites which collide
because we anticipate losing satellites for many reasons in any large constellation. The
fundamental problem is the debris cloud that results from any satellite collision. The
velocity imparted to the particles resulting from the collision is small relative to the
orbital velocity. Consequently, the net effect of a collision is to take two trackable,
possibly controllable satellites and transform them into thousands of untrackable

7. l\vo satellites can see each other if and only if they are able to see the
same point on the ground.

Sec. 7.6.1

8. PrIncipal coverage Rgures of Merit for constellations:
• Percentage of time coverage goal Is met
• Number of satellites required to achieve the needed coverage
• Mean and maximum response times (for non-continuous coverage)
• Excess coverage percent
• Excess coverage vs.latitude

Sec. 7.2

9. Size of stationkeeping box is determined by the mission ObJectives, the [Wertz, 2001)
perturbations selected to be overcome, and the method of control.
10. For long-term constellations, absolute stationkeeping provides
signiffcant advantages and no disadvantages compared to relative
stationkeeplng.

[Wertz, 2001)

11. Orbit perturbations can be treated In 3 ways:
• Negate the perturbing force (use only when necessary)
• Control the perturbing force (best approach if control required)
• Leave perturbation uncompensated {best for cyclic perturbations}

[Wertz, 2001)

12. Performance plateaus for the number of orbit planes required are a
function of the altitude.

Sec. 7.6.1

13. Changing position within the orbit plane is easy; changing orbit planes
is hard; implies that a smaller number of orbit planes is better.

Sec.7.6.1

14. Constellation build-up, graceful degradation, filling In for dead sateDites, Sec. 7.6.2
and end-of-Iife disposal are critical and should be addressed as part of
constellation design.
15. Taking satellites out of the constellation at end-of-life is critical for
long-term success and risk avoidance. This Is done by:
• Deorbltlng satellites In LEO
• RaIsing them above the constellation above LEO (Including GEO)

Sees. 6.5, 7.6.2

200

Orbit and ConsteDadon Design

7.6

particles that spread out with time in the same orbits as the original satellites.
Because the energy is proportional to mv2, even a small piece of a satellite carries an
enormous amount of kinetic energy at orbital velocities.· Because the debris cloud remains in the constellation orbit, it dramatically increases the potential for secondary
collisions which, in tum, continues to increase the amount of debris and the possibility
of making the orbit "uninhabitable." The implication for constellation design is that
we should go to great lengths to design the constellation and the spacecraft to avoid
collisions, explosions, or generation of extraneous debris. Methods for doing this are
summarized in Table 7-14.
TABLE 7-14. Key Issues In Designing a Constellation tor Collision Avoidance.

Approach or Issue

Comment

May impact phasing between planes
and, therefore, coverage.
2. Remove satellites at end-of-life.
Either deorbit or raise them above the
constellation, If stiO functioning.
3. Determine the motion through the constellation of a Constellations at low altitude have an
satellite that "dies In place."
advantage.
4. Remove upper steges from the orbital ring or leave Do not leave uncontrolled objects In
them attached to the satellite.
the constellation pattern.
S. Design the approach for rephaslng or replacement of Allintersateliite motion should assess
satellites with collision avoidance in mind.
collision potential.
6. Capture any components which are ejected.
Look for explosive bolts. lens caps.
Marmon clamps. and slrru1ar discards.
7. Avoid the potential for self-generated explosions.
Vent propellant tanks for spent spacecraft.
1. Maximize the spacing between satellites when
crossing other orbit planes.

References
Austin. R.E., M.I. Cruz, and J.R. French. 1982. "System Design Concepts and
Requirements for Aeroassisted Orbital Transfer Vehicles." AIAA Paper 82-1379
presented at the AlAA 9th Atmospheric Flight Mechanics Conference.
Ballard, A.H. 1980. "Rosette Constellations of Earth Satellites." IEEE Transactions
on Aerospace and Electronic Systems. AES-16:656-673.
Betts. J.T. 1977. "Optimal Three-Bum Orbit Transfer." AIAA Jourrial. 15:861-864.
Cefola, P. J. 1987. ''The Long-Term Orbital Motion of the Desynchronized Westar II."
AAS Paper 87-446 presented at the AAS/AIAA Astrodynamics Specialist Conference. Aug. 10.

r

ConsteDadon Design

7.6

201

Cooley, JL. 1912. Orbit Selection Considerations for Earth Observatory Satellites.
Goddard Space Flight Center Preprint No. X-551-72-145.
CorneIisse, I.W., H.F.R. Sch6yer, and K.F. Wakker. 1979. Rocket Propulsion and
Spaceflight Dynamics. London: Pitman Publishing Limited.
Draim, John. 1985. ''Three- and Four-Satellite Continuous Coverage ConstellaQons."

Journol of Guidance,

Contro~

and Dynamics. 6:725-730.

--.........,. 1987a. "A Common-Period Four-Satellite Continuous Global Coverage
Constellation." Journol of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics. 10:492-499.
----:. 1987b. "A Six-Satellite Continuous Global Double Coverage Constellation." AAS Paper 87-497 presented at the AAS/AlAA Astrodynamics Specialist
Conference.
Easton, R.L., and R. Brescia. 1969. Continuously Visible Satellite Constellations.
Naval Research Laboratory Report 6896.
Farquhar, Robert W. and David W. Dunham. 1998. ''The Indirect Launch Mode: A
New Launch Technique for Interplanetary Missions." IAA Paper No. L98-0901,
3rd International ConferenCe on Low-Cost Planetary Missions, California Institute
of Technology, Pasadena, CA. Apr. 27-May 1.
;
Farquhar, Robert W., D.W. Dunham, and S.-C. Jen. 1997. "CONTOUR Mission
Overview and Trajectory Design." Spaceflight Mechanics 1997, VoL 95, Advances
in the Astronautical Sciences, pp. 921-934. Presented at the AAS/AIAA Spaceflight Mechanics Meeting, Feb. 12.
Kairenberg, H.K.• E. Levin, and RD. Luders, 1%9. "Orbit Synthesis." The Journol of
the Astronautical Sciences. 17:129-177.
Kaufman, B., C.R. Newman, and F. Chromey. 1%6. Gravity Assist Optimization
Techniques Applicable to a Variety of Space Missions. NASA Goddard Space
Flight Center. Report No. X-507-66-373.
Mease, K.D. 1988. "Optimization of Aeroassisted Orbital Transfer: Current Status."
The Journol ofthe Astronautical &iences. 36:7-33.
Meissinger, Hans F. 1970. "Earth Swingby-A Novel Approach to Interplanetary
Missions Using Electric Propulsion." AIAA Paper No. 70-117, AIAA 8th Electric
Propulsion Conference, Stanford, CA. Aug. 31-Sept 2.

Chobotov. V.A. ed. 1996. Orbital Mechanics (2nd Edition). Washington, DC: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics.

Meissinger, Hans F., Simon Dawson, and James R. Wertz. 1997. "A Low-Cost
Modified Launch Mode for High-C3Interplanetary Missions." AAS Paper
No. 97-711, AAS/AlAA Astrodynamics Specialist Conference, Sun Valley, ID.
Aug. 4-7.

*The relative velocity of two objects in low-Earth orbit will be approximately 14 kmls x sin
(812). where 9 is the angle of intersection between the orbits. 14 kmls times the sine of almost
anything is a big number.

Meissinger, Hans F. and S. Dawson. 1998. ''Reducing Planetary Mission Cost by a
Modified Launch Mode." IAA Paper No. L98-0905, 3rd IAA International Conference on Low-Cost Planetary Missions, California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, CA.' 1997.

202

Orbit and Constellation Design

7.6

T

Mora. Miguel Bell6, Jose Prieto Munoz, and Genevieve Dutruel-Lecohier. 1997.
"Orion-A Constellation Mission Analysis Tool." International Workshop on
Mission Design and Implementation of Satellite Constellations, International Astronautical Federation, Toulouse, France. Nov. 17-19.
Soop, E.M. 1994. Handbook of Geostationary Orbits. Dordrecht, The Netherlands:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Vallado, David A. 1997. Fundamentals of Astrodynamics and Applications. New
York: McGraw-Hill.

ChapterS
The Space Environment and Survivability
8.1

Walker, J.G. 1971. "Some Circular Orbit Patterns Providing Continuous Whole Earth
Coverage." Journal ofthe British Interplanetary Society. 24: 369-384.
-----,. 1977. Continuous Whole-Earth Coverage by Circular-Orbit Satellite Patterns, Royal Aircraft Establishment Technical Report No. 77044.
- - - - , . 1984. "Satellite Constellations." Journal of the British Interplanetary
Society. 37:559-572.
Wertz, J.R., TL. Mullikin, and R.F. Brodsky. 1988. "Reducing the Cost and Risk of
Orbit Transfer." Journal ofSpacecraft and Rockets. 25:75-80.
Wertz, J.R. 2001. Mission Geometry; Orbit and Constellation Design and Management. Torrance, CA: Microcosm Press and Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.

8.2

The Space Environment
The Solar Cycle; The Gravitational Field and
Microgravity; The Upper Atmosphere; Plasmas,
the Magnetic Field, and Spacecraft Charging;
Radiation and Associated Degradation
Hardness and Survivability Requirements
The Nuclear Weapons Enviro1U'1lenJ and Its Effect
on Space Systems; Other Hostile Environments;
Spacecraft Hardening; Strategies for Achieving
Survivability

S.l The Space Environment
Alan C. Tribble, InteUectualInsights
D.J. Gorney, J.B. Blake, H.C. Koons, M. Schulz, A.L. Vampola,
R.L. Walterscheid, The Aerospace Corporation
James R. We~ Microcosm, Inc.
The near-Earth space and atmospheric environments strongly influence the performance and lifetime of operational space systems by affecting their size, weight,
complexity, and cost. Some environmental interactions also limit the technical potential of these systems. They can lead to costly malfunctions or even the loss of components or subsystems [Tribble, 1995; Hastings and Garrett, 1996; DeWitt et al., 1993].
By itself, operating under vacuum-like conditions can pose significant problems for
many spacecraft systems. When under vacuum, most organic materials will outgas
-the generation of spurious molecules which may act as contaminants to other
surfaces. Even before reaching orbit, particles from the atmosphere may fall onto
optical surfaces and degrade the performance of electro-optical instrumentation.
Because there is no practical way to clean spacecraft surfaces once the vehicle reaches
orbit, maintaining effective contamination control during design and development is a
significant issue for most spacecraft [Tribble et al., 19%].
Once orbit is obtained, the spacecraft is subjected to a very tenuous atmosphere
[Tascione, 1994]. At lower orbits a spacecraft will be bombarded by the atmosphere
at orbital velocities on the order of -8 kmls. Interactions between the satellite and the
neutral atmosphere can erode satellite surfaces, affect the thermal and electrical
properties of the surface, and possibly degrade spacecraft structures.

203

204

The Space Environment and Survivability

8.1

At shuttle altitudes, -300 kIn, about 1% of the atmosphere is ionized. This fraction
increases to essentially 100% ionization in the geosynchronous environment The
presence of these charged particles, called the plasma environment, can cause differential charging of satellite components on the surface and interior of the vehicle. If
severe, this charging can exceed breakdown electric fields and the resulting electrostatic discharges may be large enough to disrupt electronic components. More energetic space mdiation, such as electrons with energies from about 200 keV to 15 MeV
can become embedded in dielectric components and produce electrostatic discharg~
in cable insulation and circuit boards. This bulk clwrging may disrupt a subsystem's
signals or the operation of its devices. Even if mild, the charging may alter the electrical potential of the spacecraft relative to space and affect the opemtion of scientific
instrumentation.
Very energetic (MeV-GeV) charged particles can be found in the trapped radiation
belts, solar flare protous, and galactic cosmic rays. The total dose effects of this highenergy radiation can degrade microelectronic devices, solar arrays, and sensors. A
single energetic particle can also cause single-event phenomena within microelectronic devices which can temporarily disrupt or permanently damage components.
Lastly, orbiting spacecraft are periodically subjected to hypervelocity impacts by
1 J1IIl or larger sized pieces of dust and debris. If the impacting particles originate in
nature they are termed micrometeoroids.1f the particles ~ man-made they are termed
orbital debris. A single collision with a large micrometeoroid or piece of orbital debris
can terminate a mission. The probability of this occurring will increase significantly
with the introduction of large constellations of satellites.
The subject of space environment effects is, by itself, an area of active research.
The more critical of the various effects are discussed below.
8.1.1 The Solar Cycle

This subject is of particular interest because of the fact that the solar activity is seen
to vary with an ll-year cycle as shown in Fig. 8-1 [NOAA, 1991). The plot shows the
FlO.7 index, which is the mean daily flux at 10.7 em wavelength in units of 10-22
W/m2 • Hz. The peaks in the FI0.7 index are called solar maxima, while the valleys
are called solar minima. Note that the variations are substantial on a day-to-day basis
and that one solar maximum may have levels that vary dramatically from other solar
maxima. Consequently, predicting the level at any given future time is highly
uncertain. On the other hand, the avenge over an extended period of time is well
known. As will be seen, many space environment effects are strongly dependent on
the solar cycle.

,
8.1.2 The Gravitational Field and Microgravity*
Microgravity, also called weightlessness, free fall, or zero-g, is the nearly complete
absence of any of the effects of gravity. In the microgravity environment of-a satellite,
objects don't fall. particles don't settle out of solution, bubbles don't rise, and convection CUITents don't occur. Yet in low-Earth orbit, where all of these phenomena occur,
the gravitational force is about 90% of its value at the Earth's surface. Indeed, it is the
gravitational field that holds the satellite in its orbit.

* Contributed by James R. Wertz, Microcosm, Inc.

r

The Space Environment

S.l

285

500

¥
13'

.

450

...............:. ............... : .............. .

400

.•............. :.....•.......... ! ........•......

~

350

~
Ii:

300

!.iii

250
200

~

d
u:

150
100
50
1940

2000

Year

Ag.8-1.

Observed Dally Radio Aux at 10.7 em Adjusted to 1.AU.

In Earth orbit microgravity comes about because the satellite is in free fall-i.e., it
is continuously falling through space and all of the parts of the satellite are falling
together. In a circular orbit the forward velocity of the spacecraft (tangential to the
direction to the Earth) is just enough that the continual falling of the spacecraft toward
the Earth keeps the satellite at the same distance from the Earth's center. Moving in a
circular orbit requires a continuous accelention toward the center.
The term microgravity is used in the space environment because, in practice, zero
gravity cannot actually be achieved. Two objects traveling very near each other in
orbit will not travel in quite the same path due to differences in the gravirlltional forces
or external nongravitational forces acting on them. Two objects held side by side lqId
dropped from a tall building will both accelerate toward the center of the Earth and, as
they fall, will converge slightly toward each other. From the point of view of the
objeets, there is a small component of Earth gravity that pulls them toward each other.
An orbiting spacecraft under the influence of atmospheric drag or solar radiation pressure will feel a very small force due to this external pressure. This force can mimic the
effect of gravity, causing heavy particles in solution to settle toward the front end of a
moving spacecraft. Similarly, a rotating spacecraft produces "artificial gravity" due to
centrifugal force. Fmally, tidal forces, sometimes called gravity-gradient forces, come
about because of very small differences in the force of gravity over an extended object
For a spherical bubble drifting in orbit, the force of gravity on the lower edge of the
bubble will be stronger than at the center of mass and weaker at the far edge of the
bubble. This very small difference in forces results in ''tides'' which will distort the
shape of the bubble and elongate it toward and away from the direction to the Earth.
For most practical applications, microgravity effects in low-Earth orbit can be
reduced to the level of 10-6 g (= 1 p.g). A level of 1<r7 g can be achieved over a very
small region near the center of mass of the spacecraft. Table 8-1 provides formulas for
the most common forces in the microgravity environment In this table, z is the .
direction toward nadir and Zis the acceleration in the nadir direction. (J) is the angular
velocity of the satellite in its orbit Note that for a nadir-pointing spacecraft, the spacecraft rotates in inertial space at a rate of one rotation per orbit and thus will add to the
acceleration environment due to the centrifugal force of this rotation. In low-Earth

The Space Environment and Survivability

206

8.1

orbit, the lowest microgravity level can be achieved in an inertially-oriented spacecraft
rather than a nadir-oriented spacecraft. The last row in Table 8-1 is the coriolis force
which is an ap~nt sidewise force that occurs whenever objects move (e.g., fluid
flow in a chemical process) in a rotating reference frame, such as a gravity-gradient
stabilized spacecraft.
.
TABLE 8-1. Equations for Mlcrogravlty Level. CO Is the orbital angular velocity. COLEO =
(pJa3)112 = 0.00106 radls. X, ~ and z are the dlstances from the spacecraft center
of mass.
Source
Aerodynamic Drag
Gravity Gradlent
CenbffU~(duetospa~ft

rotation In Inertial frame)
Sinusoidal Vibration along
X axis of frequency f
and amplitude A

x direction
(velocity)

y direction
(orbit normal)

zdlrectlon
(nadir)

ii = 0.5 (CoA I m)pa2ol

yeO

z=O

X=_}((J)2

y=_Y{j)2

z=2z{j)2

X=}((J)2

yeO

Z=Z{j)2

-

-

yeO

z=-2kco

j{ = A (21r,f)2

Coriolis Force from material
moving In the spacecraft frama

x=2Zto

TABLE 8-2. Mlcrogravlty Levels. Each entry gives the conditions under which a mlcrogravlty
level of 1 JI.9 wHl be achieved, assuming a gravity-gradlent stabilized spacecraft at
700 krn. c.m. = center of mass.
x direction

ydlrectlon

zdlrectlon

AltItude of 360 krn at solar
max, 260 krn at solar min
for mlCoA = 65 kglm2

-

-

Gravity Gradlent

7.3 m from c.m.

7.3 m from c.m.

3.6 m from C.m.

CenbffUgai

7.3 m from c.m.

7.3 m from c.m.

A=2x1~mat10Hz

-

z=4.6mmls

-

Source
Aerodynamic Drag

Sinusoidal Vibration
CoriollS Force

x=-4.6mmls

Table 8-2 uses the formulas in the previous table to compute the conditions under
which 1 J.l.g is achieved. This gives an idea of the scale over which specific microgravity values can be obtained. Microgravity levels could be substantially lowered by
conducting microgravity experiments well away from the vicinity of the Earth or other
large objects.
Microgravity leads to a wide variety of chemical and manufacturing processes that
cannot occur on the surface of the Earth. Heavier particles in a solution do not settle
out and bubbles do not rise to the surface. This allows uniform, universal mixing and
permits chemical reactions to occur that could not occur on Earth because separation
or weight collapse would hinder completion of the reaction or hardening of the
material. Surface tension and other inter-molecular forces can take over that would

The Space Environment

8.1

207

otherwise be dominated by gravitational settling. Similarly, convection does not occur
in space and heated materials do not churn or boil. This allows differential heating to
take place to provide other chemical reactions. Because settling does not occur, very
large crystals can be formed in space which have a variety of industrial applications.
Containerless processing and working in the vacuum of space can lead to extrem~ly
pure chemicals for use in both pharmaceuticals and manufacturing. Microgravity is a
whole new science which is just beginiling to evolve.
8.1.3 The Upper Atmosphere*
The upper atmosphere affects spacecraft by generating aerodynamic drag lift and
heat, and through the chemically corrosive effects of highly reactive elements such as
atomic oxygen. The effects of aerodynamic lift and heating are important during
launch and reentry. AerodyDamic drag is addressed in Sec. 6.2.3.
Drag depends on the ballistic coefficient (which is a function of atmospheric composition and temperature), velocity relative to the wind, and atmospheric density. We
can either estimate the ballistic coefficient based on the configuration of the spacecraft, or bound the problem using typical upper and lower limits as shown in Table 8-3.
TABLE 8-3. Typical Ballistic Coefficients for Low-Earth Orbit SateDites. Values for crosssectional area and drag coefficients are estimated from the approximate shape,
size, and orientation of the satellite and solar arrays. [XA = cross-sectional]
Max.
SateJDte

Mass
(kg)

MIn.

Max.

MIn.

XA

XA

XA

Drag

Drag

Shape

XA
{m2}

(m2)

Coal.

Coal.

Max.

MIn.

BaDJstlc BaDJstlc
Ccief.
Coef.
{kglm2} (kglm2)

Type

or

MIssIon

5

box

0.075

0.0584

4

2

42.8

16.7

Comm.

Intercos.-16

550

cyIInd.

2.7

3.16

2.67

2.1

82.9

76.3

ScIenIII!c

VIk!ng

277

octag.

2.25

0.833

4

2.6

128

30.8

Sclentlllc

Explorer-11

37

octag.

0.18

0.07

2.83

2.6

203

72.6

AsIJOnomy

·0.621

0scar-1

2

2

152

152

ScIenIII!c

14.3·

3.33

4

192

29.5

Astronomy

1.05

0.5

3.67

2.9

437

165

Solar Physics

5.99

1.81

3.76

4

147

. 47.2

Solar PhysIcs

264

14.5

3.3

4

181

12.1

Sclentlllc

10.4

1.81

3.4

4

123

25.2

Rem. Sells.

ExpIorer-17

1882

sphere

0.621

Sp. TeIes.

11,000

cyIInd.*

112

080-7

634

9-slded

0SQ.8

1,063

cyOnd."

Pegasus-3

10,500

cyDnd ••

Landsat-1

891

cyUnd..

ERS-1

2,160

box·

45.1

4

4

4

135

12.0

Rem. Sells.

LDEF-1

9,695

12-face

39

14.3

2.67

4

169

93.1

EnvIronment

HEA0-2

3,150

hexag.

13.9

4.52

2.83

4

174

80.1

AsIJOnomy

Vanguard-2

9.39

sphere

02

0.2

2

2

23.5

23.5

ScIenIiIfc

SkyLab

76,138

cyDnd."

462

46.4

3.5

4

410

47.1

SclenIIflc

Echo-1

75.3

sphere

731

731

2

2

0.515

0.515

Comm.

437

0.515

Extrema
"With solar arrays

• Contributed by R. L. WaIterscheid, The Aerospace Corporation.

208

The Space Environment and Survivability

8.1

strong drag occurs in dense atmospheres, and satellites with perigees below
-120 Ion have such short lifetimes that their orbits have no practical importance.
Above -600 Ion, on the other hand, drag is so weak that orbits usually last more than
the satellites' operational lifetimes. At this altitude, perturbations in orbital period are
so slight that we can easily account for them without accurate knowledge of the atmospheric density. At intennediate altitudes, roughly two variable energy sources cause
large variations in atmospheric density and generate orbital perturbations.cThese variations can be predicted with two empirical models: the Mass Spectrometer Incoherent
Scatter (MSIS) and the Jacchia models [Hedin, 1986; Jacchia, 1977].
Altitudes between 120 and 600 Ion are within the Earth's thermosphere, the region
above 90 Ion where the absorption of extreme ultraviolet radiation from the Sun results
in a very rapid increase in temperature with altitude. At -200-250 Ion, this temperature approaches a limiting value, called the exospheric temperature, the average
values of which range between -600 and 1,200 K over a typical solar cycle. The thermosphere. may also be strongly heated from geomagnetic activity, which transfers
energy from the magnetosphere and ionosphere. Heating of the thermosphere
increases atmospheric density because the thermosphere's expansion causes increased
pressure at fIxed altitudes.
Heating due to extreme ultraviolet radiation and its solar cycle variation has the
greatest effect on satellite lifetimes. Geomagnetic disturbances are generally too brief
to signifIcantly affect lifetimes. Extreme ultraviolet radiation from the Sun is completely absorbed before it reaches the ground and is not measured routinely by
satellite-borne instruments; consequently, its effects are unpredictable. Solar activity
is monitored using such proxy indices as sunspot number and the FIO.7 index which
was previously discussed.
Figures 8-1 to 8-4 provide a means of estimating satellite lifetimes based on the
information available to the mission designer. Figure 8-2 provides the atmospheric
density as a function of altitude corresponding to various values of the FIO.7 index.
Densities were obtained from the MSIS atmospheric model [Hedin, 1986]. Below
about 150 Ion, the density is not strongly affected by solar activity. However, at
satellite altitudes in the range of 500 to 800 Ion, the density variations between solar
maximum and solar minimum are approximately 2 orders of magnitude.
The large variations in density imply that satellites will decay more rapidly during
periods of solar maxima and much more slowly during solar minima. This is clearly
demonstrated in Fig. 8-3 which shows the altitude as a function of date for a set of9
hypothetical satellites launched over a 6-year period. We aSsume that all of the satellites were launched in a perfectly circular orbit at 700 Ion a1titude-3 in 1956 at the
beginning of a solar maximum, 3 in 1959 toward the end of the solar maximum, and
3 in 1962 near the time of solar minimum. In each group one satellite had a ballistic
coefficient. of 20 kg/r02, one was at 65 kg/m2, and one at 200 kg/m2• The histories of
the 9 satellites are shown in the graph.
Several characteristics of satellite decay are easily seen in Fig. 8-3. Satellites decay
very little during solar minimum, and then rapidly during solar maximum. For one
satellite, each solar maximum period will generally produce larger decay than the
previous maximum because the satellite is lower. It will, of course, depend on the level
of the particular solar maximum. The effect of the solar maxima will also depend on
the satellite ballistic coefficient. Those with a low ballistic coefficient will respond
quickly to the atmosphere and will tend to decay promptly. Those with high ballistic
coefficients will push through a larger number of solar cycles and will decay much

The Space Environment

8.1

10-IIII
10-00

C

~

10-'0

~

10-"

!l
III

10-'2

C

CD

C

10-'6
100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1,000

Altitude (km)

Fig. 8-2.

Density vs. Altitude for Various F10.1 Values. Note that the curves have the same
shape as the altitude maintenance curves in Fig. 7-8.

800
S!art 1956
S!art 1959 BaIIlsIIc CoefficIent = 200 kgIm
S!art 1962
Re-enter Appraximalely 2153

750
700

650
800

!

I

550
500

450

400
350
300
1950

CopyrIghI1999
Mlcrocosm, Inc.

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

TIme (years)

Rg. 8-3.

Altitude as a Function of Date for 9 HypotheUcal Satellites Launched over a
6-Year Period. The bars at approximately 400 km altitude mark the periods of solar
maxima when the FIO.7 index was above 150.

more slowly. Note that the time for satellite decay is generally measured better in solar
cycles than in years. All 9 satellites reentered during periods of solar maximum. For
the range of ·ballistic coefficients shown, the lifetimes varied from approximately half
of a solar cycle (5 years) to 17 solar cycles (190 years). Predicting where the satellite
would come down would be remarkably difficult

210

The Space Environment and Survivability

8.1

~~Cii'

,lglm
iii ...c

.c

,

-'"
uCE

\
\

ii1°
ID
N
\

()

~~

~

~

/
II

--

-'"
uCE

imB..

;::.!!!-m
~.2~

1\
~

...EE.

II

"1\

0
0

~

-&i3.

r-.~

~.2~

iii'"
IDOCD

~f'.-

()

~

.....

1iE
C)::J
cE

0
0

1:~

~~ 1\ 1\

....
i\

co

ciJ:2

:t::a;

0
0

-Eo

It)

0
0
"Ot

~~

I'l\.

~~

~

~~.....

U~

iiID & 0

0
0
t"l

l'I

t-~
~~

ON

o
o.
o

o
o

o

t\I

....

r.iii
11
Gl0.

>-

a:'iiil
~I!!~
~~Ill
~;.e

; ::

3'i~
.. E-

Ci

a~!

1:
S
en

.9!::s~

~EE

SjB
a. G)
:c~"C

CIIO=

3
ci
o 11
I CD =

d!~i
·aI

Gl.cG)
05
j§c
;ealG)
-.c
~

-~~
~Ill§
oCDE

ual
§I!!

u.~.iil

.......
: !to

:Bg

....
o
o

(s.leaA) aWllal11

0
0

0
0

()

IIIII II

'&

C

~f\

-E
1m
i Eo

--j
C)

r\

U

c~2I

"0
::J

000

II",

=J&

j.9!S

0
0

~

[0

8i~
.s

agCD
ID
c

CD

ciJ~
00

8i~

-~I!!

1:"2

~~

o CD CD

555

0
0

.!!!

'liE
C)::J
CE

-Eo

SCD ~
c~!1I
.!!!-C/)

....
0)

B~

:t::CG

...

0
0
0

IF'
I~

II I I

g. --fa

fa:~
CD~C1
e
5::s
u.oQ.

....o
o
o

0

E

§OJ

iG)1IJ
S5G)
.... 5
j5i1i

'i~'fi

i§j
i
m

II

8.1

The Space Environment

211

Figure 8-4 summarizes satellite decay in a convenient manner for mission anaiysis
use. The 3 sets of curves show lifetime as a function of initial circular altitude for
satellites with ballistic coefficients that are low (20 kglm2), moderate (65 kglm2), and
high (200 kglm2). The spread in the curves near the middle represents the difference
between solar maximum (F1O.7 =225) and solar minimum (FI0.7 =75). At the left of
the figure, below about 200 km, satellite orbits decay within a few days, the abna.
spheric density is largely independent of the solar cycle (see Fig. 8-11), and the upper
and lower curves for each coefficient begin to merge. From there to lifetimes of about
half a solar cycle (approximately 5 years) there will be a very strong difference
between satellites launched at the start of solar minimum (upper curve) and those
launched at the start of solar maximum (lower curve). Also note that the difference
between the solar maximum and solar minimum curves is 1arger for satellites with a
lower ballistic coefficient as we would expect. (Balloons respond to drag more than
bowling balls do.) After about half a solar cycle, satellites on the upper curve of each
pair will hit solar maximum and the curve will become much flatter. In contrast, those
on the lower curve will hit solar minimum and will nearly stop decaying such that the
curve becomes nearly vertical. This oscillatory pattern continues with a frequency of
the II-year solar cycle as can be seen in the upper portion of the curves. FmaUy at high
altitudes and long lifetimes the curves come together because the satellite will see a
large number of solar cycles and it will make very little difference when the satellite
starts. of course the actual lifetime for any particular satellite will depend on both the
actual FlO.7 index variations and the design and attitude history of the satellite. Nonetheless, Fig. 8-13 provides an estimate of the extrema for use in mission design and
can be used to estimate the lifetime for a specific satellite if the ballistic coefficient and
launch date relative to the solar cycle are know.
Atomic oxygen-the predominant abnospheric constituent from -200 km to
-600 km-is another important part of the upper abnosphere's effect on space
systems. This form of oxygen can react with thin organic films, advanced composites,
and metallized surfaces [Visentine, 1988], resulting in degraded sensor performance.
For example, Kapton, a material commonly used for insulation and seals, erodes at a
rate of approximately 2.8 J.1.lll for every 1024 atomslm2 of atomic oxygen fluence
[Leger et al., 1984]. The fluence, lb, over a time interval 1; is given by
lb=~IT

~)

where PH is the number density of atomic oxygen (see Fig. 8-5), and V is the satellite
velocity. (See tables on inside rear cover.) In addition, chemical reactions involving
atomic oxygen may produce radiatively active, excited constituents which, in tum,
emit significant amounts of background radiation, create effects such as "Shuttle
glow," and interfere with optical sensors.
Atomic oxygen forms when solar ultraviolet radiation dissociates molecular
oxygen. Above 110 km, abnospheric constituents diffuse, and each constituent's
density varies with altitude according to its scale height. The scale height of a
constituent is the height change over which the density drops to lie of its value. In
diffusive equilibrium, the scale height is inversely proportional to its molecular
weight. Thus, the density of light constituents decreases less rapidly with altitude than
the density of heavy constituents, and eventuaUy the· light constituents dominate the
mixture of gases. Atomic oxygen is lighter than the molecular nitrogen and oxygen; therefore, near -170 km altitude, atomic oxygen becomes the most abundant
constituent.

212

The Space En'Yironment.and Survivability

8.1

The Space En'Yironment

8.1

BOO

213

Magnetoshealh
t -_ _ IOOWKIIIlY L a y e r _

F10.7=50
F10.7 250

600

=

-+
-+
-+
-+
-+
-+
-+
-+
-+
-+
-+
-+
-+
-+

200

O~~~-L~~~~~-L~~~.
107
1012
1017
1()22
Number Density (alDmslm3)

Fig. 8-5. AltItude Profiles of Number Density of Atomic Oxygen at Solar Minimum (Sond
Une) and Solar Maximum (Dashed Une).

Figure 8-5 shows altitude profiles of atomic oxygen number density over the
equator for FIO.7 values of 50 and 250. These values represent the extremes for solar
minimum and maximum, respectively. The profiles are based on predictions from the
MSIS model [Hedin, 1986) for 3 p.m.local time at northern hemisphere equinox and
for geomagneticaIly quiet conditions [Walterscheid, 1989). Up to 150 km, the solarcycle variation is small, but it increases steadily with increasing altitude. By 300 kIn,
the number density of atomic oxygen at solar maximum becomes an order of magnitude greater than at solar minimum.
The large solar-cycle variation in atomic oxygen means spacecraft materials can be
selected based on phasing the mission to the solar cycle. Since there are large differences between solar cycles, material choices made on the basis of average solar maximum conditions may be inappropriate because of the possibility of more extreme
solar maximum conditions.
8.1.4 Plasmas, The Magnetic Field, and Spacecraft Charging-

The Earth's magnetic field is roughly dipolar; that is,
B(R),)

= (1 + sin2 A)ll2 BoIR3

(8-2)

where B is the local magnetic field intensity, A. is the magnetic latitude, R is the radial
distance measured in Earth radii (RE ), and Bo is the magnetic field at the equator at the
Earth's swface [Bo = B(R = RE, A. = 0) = 0.30 gauss].
As shown in Fig. 8-6, the interaction between the solar wind and the Earth's
magnetic field causes magnetic field on the night side of the Earth to stretch into a very
elongated structure known as the magnetotail (see Tsyganenko [1987] for a more
complete model of the Earth's magnetic field). A thin plasma sheet bifurcates the
magnetotail, which extends over 1,000 Earth radii paraIlel to the flow velocity of the
solar wind.
• Contributed by H. C. Koons, The Aerospace Corporatio~.

Rg. H.

A Cross SectIon of the Earth's Magnetosphere. It shows the key plasma and
energetic particle populations which respond to variations in solar wind parameters.

Through the interaction between the solar wind and the Earth's magnetic'field,
some of the solar wind's kinetic energy is converted to magnetic energy stored in the
magnetotail. Because this energy cannot build up indefinitely, magnetic substorms
dissipate it from time to time. These substorms produce an energized plasma (5 to
50 keV) that is injected toward the Earth. This hot plasma can extend into geosynchronous orbits, charging the swface of any spacecraft within it to high negative voltages.
The electrical potential of a spacecraft or component is measured with respect to
the plasma in which it is immersed where the net current flow is zero. That is, the
following currents must cancel each other: (1) the electron current from the plasma to
the vehicle, (2) the ion current from the plasma to the vehicle, (3) the secondary electron current, (4) the backscattered electron current, and (5) the photoelectron current.
The voltage at the component's surface also depends on the material's capacitance
with respect to the surrounding materials, especially the vehicle ground.
Because materials have varying secondary emission coefficients and photoelectron
currents, their equilibrium potentials also differ. An electrostatic arc occurs if the electric field exceeds the breakdown field along the surface of the material, through the
material, or between adjacent materials. Electromagnetic interference, EMI, from
such arcs can cause spacecratyto operate erratically [Robinson, 1989).
Surface charging detrimental to vehicle operation occurs mainly in orbits where
electrons with energies of 10 to 20 keV dominate the electron current from the plasma
to the vehicle. At low altitudes this charging occurs only at high latitudes where
auroral electrons collide with the vehicle which is passing through an otherwise cold,
low-density plasma [Gussenhoven et aI., 1985]. For other low-altitude locations, lowenergy electrons usually develop enough current to keep electric fields below
breakdown levels.
In higher orbits, such as geosynchronous, swface charging occurs during magnetospheric substorms between the longitudes corresponding to midnight and dawn
[Fennell et ·aI., 1983]. We can approximate the electron-flux distribution during a
substorm.by summirig a cold and a hot Maxwellian distribution. The cold component
has a density of 0.2 cnr3 and a temperature of 0.4 keY; the hot component has a

214

The Space Environment and Survivability

density of about 2.3 cor3 and a temperature of 25 keY [Mullen et aI., 1981]. We must
design spacecraft which either keep the differential charging caused by this plasma
well below breakdown potentials, or can tolerate the resulting electrostatic discharges.
Design guidelines are available to help reduce differential potentials on vehicle
surfaces [Purvis et aI., 1984; Vampola et aI., 1985]. For example, we can select candidate materials and conductive coatings, apply numerical or analytical models using
their quantifiable characteristics, and determine their differential potentials in space.
IT we cannot prevent discharges by selecting alternative materials, we might consider
alternatives such as special filtering, cabling, or grounding. We can employ coupling
models for electromagnetic interference simulation, and test the vehicle for electrostatic discharges in its flight configuration.
_
It is important to note that while differential charging as discussed in the preceding
paragraphs is not seen in lower equatorial orbits, the spacecraft potential may be as
much as 90% of the solar array voltage more negative than that of the surrounding
plasma depending on the configuration of the spacecraft electrical power supply. This
may be a concern on scientific missions, where nonbiased measurements of the plasma
environment are desired, and may also give rise to arcing or other undesirable effects
ifhigh voltage power supplies are used [Tribble, 1995].
8.1.5 Radiation and Associated Degradation
Trapped Radiotion·

The Van Allen radiation belts are a permanent hazard to orbiting spacecraft. They
consist of electrons and ions (mostly protons) having energies greater than 30 keV and
are distributed nonuniformly within the magnetosphere. As illustrated in Fig. 8-7, the
energetic electrons preferentially populate a pair of toroidal regions centered on the
magnetic shells L - 1.3 (inner zone) and L - 5 (outer zone).

8.1

215

The Space Environment

A magnetic L-shell is the surface generated by rotating a magnetic field line around
the dipole axis. It approximately satisfies the equation
R

= L cos2 A

(8-3)

where R is the distance in Earth radii from the idealized point dipole near the Earth's
center, and A is the magnetic latitude. Thus, the L value of a dipolar magnetic shell is
its equatorial radius measured in Earth radii. A generaIized concept of L, introduced
by McDwain [1961], takes account of the way higher harmonics of the main
geomagnetic field perturb the motion ?f charged ~cles from their dipolar.trajectories. Normally, we use this concept Instead of the dipole L value for mapp~g the
trapped radiation environment. Standard models of the Van ~en bel!S
available
from the National Space Science Data Center. The model which proVides Inner zone
(L = 1.2 - 2.4) electron data is AE8, which has an average energy range of 40 keY to
5 MeV [Bilitza et aI., 1988]. AES has two forms, AESMIN and AESMAX, which
represent the time-averaged environments during solar minimum and maximum.
Outer-zone electron fluxes vary much more over time than inner-zone fluxes.
Indeed, during a major magnetic storm, the equatorial intensity at a given energy and
L value may grow by several orders of magnitude (factors of 10) in less than a day.
Between storms, such flux enhancements usually decay exponentially with an energy.
.'
dependent lifetime 't' - 10 E(MeV) days at L > 3.
Available proton models are APSMIN and APSMAX, which also represent the
solar minimum and maximum periods. At solar maximum, the increased atmospheric
densities decrease the proton fluxes because the trapped protons collide with the
atmosphere at low altitudes. The APS models cover the energy range from 100 keV to
> 400 MeV. Figure 8-8 shows soine of APSMIN's typical contours for proton fluxes
in (R. A) space. Since the MIN model predicts slightly more flux than the MAX model, it can be used during solar maximum or as a conservative model for long-term
missions.

m:.

Protons
E~100MeV

Rg. 8-7.

Electron Belts of the Inner and Outer Zones. The numbers on the contours
represent the log10 of the integral omnidirectional flux in units of particles em-2 S-1. The
horizontal axis Is the magnetic equator marked In units of Earth radB. Only electrons
with energIes above 0.5 MeV are Included. [Adapted from Vette et a1., 1966, by Schulz
and Lanzerottl, 1974].

• Contributed by M. Schulz and A. L. VampoJa, The Aerospace Corporation.

Rg. 8-8.

High-Energy Protons In the Inner Zone. Axes and units are the same es on Rg. 8-7.
(Note a somewhat different scale.) Data Is the omnidirectional flux from the APBMIN
model. Only protons with energies above 100 MeV are considered.

Using the energetic proton models (e.g., AP8) is difficult because they are
organized in terms of B (loCal magnetic field intensity) and 1. Secular variations in the
Earth's magnetic field drive the normally stable energetic protons toward low~
altitudes and the models do not take this into account. Thus, if we project the magnetic

216

The Space Environment and Survivability

8.1

217

The Space Environment

8.1

107 r----,-----,-----,-----,-----------,

~...-I---+---- r--- 0~1

Hemispherical
Shield
Thickness

(g1cm2 of
Aluminum)

1~ L--L~_L~__L~\~~~~~__~~~~
10

2,000

4,000

6,000

8,000

Altitude (ian)

Fig. 8-9.

Radiation Dose Rates as a Function of Altitude for Low-Altitude Polar Orbits.
Dose rates are shown for several shielding depths.

field more than 10-15 years into the future, our calculations will be invalid for lowaltitude orbits [Konradi and Hardy, 1987]. The present and future configurations of the
inner-zone proton belt probably will not differ much, provided both are described in
terms of Land A.
We can determine the appropriate amount of shielding for future spacecraft by
computing the dose rate for the desired orbit as a function of shield thickness. To do
so, we must apply a radiation transport computation to the time-averaged space
environment. Figure 8-9 shows how various shielding depths affect radiation doses in
low-altitude polar orbits. Figure 8-10 shows results for geosynchronous satellites. A
rad is that amount of radiation which deposits 100 ergs (= 6.25 X 107 MeV) per gram
of target material (100 mils of aluminum is equivalent to 0.686 glcm2). The total
radiation dose consists of three components: proton dose, electron dose, and
bremsstrahlung X-ray dose produced by the interaction of electrons with the shielding
material. In low-Earth orbits, energetic protons in the inner radiation belt contribute
most to the total radiation dose. Radiation. dose strongly depends on altitude; below
1,000 km the dose increases at approximately the 5th power of the altitude. At
synchronous altitude the greater than 5 MeV proton dose is negligible and the
bremsstrahlung dose dominates the electron dose for shield thicknesses greater than
1 em.
Figure 8-10 illustrates that protons trapped near a geosynchronous orbit do not have
enough energy to penetrate 10 mils of aluminum. Nevertheless, many trapped protons
and heavier ions in this region of space have energies around 10-200 keV. These
lower-energy ions can harm space systems differently than penetrating radiation. By
depositing their energy in the spacecraft skin, the lower-energy ions can cause a temperature rise sufficient to significantly enhance the infrared background. Heat loads of
up to 0.5 W/m2 are possible. These same low-energy ions can degrade the effectiveness of paints and protective glass ~y breaking chemical bonds in their surface layers.
We cannot shield against these effects.

100

1,000

10,000

Shield ThIckness (mU - aluminum)

10,000
Fig. 8-10.

Radiation Dose Rate In Geosynchronous Equatorial Orbit for Various Shield
Thicknesses.

Solar Particle Events·

:ue

Solar particle events (SPes) occur in association with solar flares. SPEs
rapid
increases in the flux of energetic particles (- 1 MeV to above 1 GeV) lasting from
several hours to several days. On the average, only a few SPEs occur per y~
however, they have important consequences for man-~e systems and for
~
space. For example, they degrade solar array ele':Ilents, ~ background noISe m
many types of electro-optical sensors, ~d cause .illnessesm astro~auts.
Figure 8-11 shows the typical evolution over time of a solar particle event observed
near Earth. The profile depends on the time evolution of the originating solar flare,
how long the energetic particles take to diffuse ~thin the solar coro~a.~d how ~e
particles propagate within the interplanetary medium. Protons of relatiVlstic energtes
arrive at Earth within minutes after the flare's occurrence" Lower energy (-lO's of
MeV) protons are slowed by diffusion within the solar corona and by interactions with
the interplanetary medium. After a solar particle eve~t ~, proton flux~ ~y to
background noise values over several days. The practical Importance of an mdiVldual
event depends on its maximum intensity, its duration, and the relative abundance of
the higbest-energy components and heavy n11:clei.
.
The frequency of proton events peaks within a year or two of sunspot maxunum and
diminishes greatly during the few years surrounding sunspot minimum. Nevertheless,
intense events can occur virtually any time within the II-year sunspot cycle except at
sunspot minimum. Table 8-4 shows when the most and fewest sunspots will occur for
solar cycles 21-25.
The intensities of typical solar proton events closely follow a log-normal distribution [Jursa, 1985; King, 1974; Feynman et al., 1988); thus, a few individual events can
dominate the total proton fluence observed over a comp!ete solar cycl~. Table 8-5
shows the parameters of this distribution. For example, usmg the values m Table 8-5,
a typi·cal solar proton event has a fluence above 10 MeV of IOS.21 cnr2, whereas an
2
extreme (30) event would contribute 10<8.27 + 3 x .0.59) cnr2 = 1.1 x 1010 CDr.

m:m

• Contributed by D. J. Gorney. The Aerospace Corporation.

218

The Space Environment and Survivability

8.1

The Space Environment

8.1

219

100

104

llilll

I

f\

>29MeV

103

sll!l

50
20

1"'-

1-

'\

,
,,'

f'd~

·\

A

VPra!ons'

>500~~1
1

~

f\

.X·Rays

r--

y,
Yr

y,

.
... ..
···

~I02

:\
10

l

100

l

111

0.1

109

10'0

10"

Fluence (PartIcle • cm"2)

~

Fig. 8-12. . A Plot of the Probabilities of exceeding Given Fluence Levels for Satellite
Mission Durations of 1, 2, 3, 5, and 7 Years. The plot represents protons with
energies above 10 MeV. These values pertain to satenlte missions near the solar
activity maxima [Feynman et aI., 1988].

TIme (hours) 1 Day 2 Days 1 Week

Fig. 8-11. Typical TIme Evolution of a Solar PartIcle Event Observed on Earth.
TABLE 8-4. Years of S,unspot Maxima and Minima for Solar Cycles 21-25.

21

22

23

24

25

Sunspot Maximum

1979

1990

2001

2012

2023

Sunspot Minimum

1985

1996

2007

2018

2029

Solar Cycle

I

i~ 10-2 1-7"'I=>o-H~-+-+-+---I

TABLE 8-5. Parameters of the Log-Normel Probability DIstributions for Solar Proton
Events. [King. 1974].
.

>10

>30

>60

>100

Log Auence (cnr2)

827±0.59

7.28 ± 0.75

6.63 ± 0.95

5.77 ± 124

Log Peak Aux (cnr2 sec-1)

3.27 ± 0.64

2.37 ± 0.82

1.88 ± 0.78

Energy Range (MeV)

iI

• Contributed by J. B. Blake. The Aerospace Corporation.

3
10-

1,0-4
~

Figure 8-12 shows the probability of the proton fluence (energy >10 MeV) exceeding a given value over time intervals of 1-7 years (typical of the durations of many
satellite missions). Solar array outputs typically degrade by a few percent following
exposure to fluences above -109 cm-2 at energies over -I MeV, but actual degradation
rates depend on cell type, cover glass thickness, and cell age.
Galactic Cosmic Rays·
Galactic cosmic rays, or GeR, are particles which reach the vicinity of the Earth
from outside the solar system. The number and type of nuclei in these particles are
proportional to those in solar system material. Figure 8-13 shows the energy spectrum
for several elements. The sum of the curves in the lower energy portion of the figure
suggests that cosmic rays undergo solar-cycle modulation.

t--7f...."..~--lt---I---I

10-'

I--+--+\--\l--\----l-\,---I

10-6 I---+--+---'H-'\-\+--\--I
10-8 1--+--+--1-'\-\:+\--'1
7

'0- '-0_-=2--''0-_:-'-'-'-00::---''-:0':-'-''02'-:-'---''09
'

Fig. 8-13.

Energy (GeV/nucleon)

Energy Spectra for Several Elements of Galactic Cosmic Rays. The energy for
hydrogen has been multiplied by a factor of 5 to distinguish it from the heDum curve.

Cosmic rays pose a serious hazard because a single particle can cause a malfunction
in common electronic components such as random access memory, microprocessors,
and henet power transistors. When a single passing particle causes this malfunction,
we call radiation effects single-event phenomena, or SEP.
A galactic cosmic ray loses energy mainly by ionization. This energy loss depends
chiefly on the square of the particle's charge, Z. and can be increased if the particle

220

The Space Environment and Survivability

8.1

undergoes nuclear interactions within an electronic part. Thus, lower-Z (and more
abundant) ions ~it as much energy in a device as less abundant, higher-Z ions.
When the galactic cosmic ray leaves electron-hole pairs in a depletion region of an
electronic device, the electric field in that region sweeps up the pairs. Figure 8-14
shows this process schematically.
Fast Charged
ParUcle

Energetic

Proton

Depletion Raglon lii*i!jj\i'l-q!

Rg.8-14.

Schematic Showing How Galactic Cosmic Rays Deposit Energy In an Electronic Device.

Single~event phenomena include three different effects in electronic components.
The first IS the so-called bitflip, or single-event upset (SEU), which neither damages
the part nor inu:neres with its sub8e9uent operation. The second is single-event latchup (SEL). In this case, the part hangs up, draws excessive current, and will no longer
operate until the power to the device is turned off and then back on. The excessive
current drawn in the latched condition can destroy the device if the power supply
cannot ~andle the current. When latchup demands too much current for the power
supply, It may drag down the bus voltage, or even damage supply. The third effect is
single-event burnout (SEB). This causes the device to fail permanently.
To evaluate the frequency of single-event phenomena for a given part, we must
know three things: the external environment; how the incident energy spectrum and
particle intensity change as a particle passes through the spacecraft to the sensitive
device; and how the electronic device responds to ionizing radiation. We find these
phenomena difficult to evaluate because of the complex interactions between the radiation environment and the device's circuit elements. On-orbit failure rates can be
predicted primarily for single-event upsets in memory devices, with well defined
sensitive volumes, in which the galactic cosmic rays produce electron-hole pairs. A
useful equation developed by Petersen [1995] expresses the upset rate R as follows:

(8-4)

where R is the number of upsets or errors per bit day, (JL is the limiting cross section
(sensitive area) of the device in cm2, and Lo.25 is the linear energy transfer (LET) at
25% of the limiting cross section in units of MeV/mglcm2. H experimental cross
section data is not available, but device modeling data is, then geometric data can be
used in conjunction with the predicted critical charge, and now
R=2x IQ-lOabc2 lQi

(8-5)

Hardness and Survivability Requirements

221

where R is the number of errOrs per bit day, a and b are deviCe surface dimensions in

JLDl. c is the device depth in IJ.III, and C2c is the critical charge in pC. These two equations have been shown to predict upset rates in .the geosynchronous orbit for solar
minimum conditions with reasonable accuracy. Scale factors for estimating error rates
for other orbits and other calculational methods may be found in Petersen [1995].
Single-event upset rates in complex devices such as microprocessors, or singleevent latchups or bumouts in any devices, cannot be reliably predicted. We must resort
to predictions based on simulated accelerator test observations and flight performance
of similar devices.
Galactic cosmic rays can also generate background noise in various satellite
subsystems such as star sensors, infrared detectors, and components employing
cbarge-coupled devices. In addition to increased noise signals, these rays create
spurious events which can masquerade as real signals. The spurious signals can affect
satellite subsystems depending on the genuine signals' frequency of occurrence, time
duration, and repetition, as well as the sophistication of the sensor system. Galactic
cosmic rays are a potential source of background noise which must be taken into
account when designing a satellite system. It should also be noted that, while this section addresses effects of galactic cosmic rays, similar effects are caused by high energy
protons and must be considered for orbits in the range of 1,000-10,000 km altitude.

8.2 Hardness and Survivability Requirements
Paul Nordin, The Boeing Company
Malcolm K. Kong, TRW Syslems & Information Technology Group
Survivizhility is the ability of a space system to perform its intended function after
being exposed to a stressing natural environment or one created by an enemy or hostile
agent. Hardness is an attribute defining the environmental stress level which a space
system can survive. As an example, a satellite or spacecraft which can withstand an
X-ray fluence of 1.0 calIcm2 or absorption of 107 rads (Si) of total dose (a rad of
absorbed dose is approximately 100 ergs/g) has a hardness of that amount. (Fluence is
the time integral of flux. Flux is the flow of energy per unit time and per unit crosssectional area.)
In the aerospace industry we now consider both natural and hostile environments
in the definition of hardness and survivability. Well-developed technologies, evolved
over the last 35 years, make it possible to design satellites to withstand natural and
modest levels of hostile environments. Although technologies for hardening against
hostile military threats and for natural survival of satellites overlap, they are distinct
and are usually treated separately except in the areas of surviVability to total dose due
to the Van Allen belts, single-event effects (SEE) caused by galactic cosmic rays and
high energy protons, and spacelbulk charging due to naturally occurring space plasmas. The latter phenomena must be treated synergistically in the design of satellites.
A military space system or commercial satellite must be survivable if we will need
its services in times of high stress, such as a nuclear war. To do this, we must understand what may cause the system to malfunction and then design it to protect against
failures. Survivability requirements include identifying the environments and their
intensities and, in most cases, designing the space system so it will continue to perform
its intended function for a specified time after exposure.

222

The Space Environment and Survivability

8.2

Commercial or scientific satellites usually do not need to be survivable to military
threats, but planners must be aware that an unhardened satellite may prematurely stop
operating after even very distant nuclear explosions. A slight hardening of satellites
can make them much more survivable. (See Sec. 8.2.3.) The Starfish high-altitude
nuclear test of July 9, 1962, illustrates the vulnerability of unhardened satellites. That
test, a 1.4 megaton device at 400 km altitude above Johnston Island in the Pacific
Ocean, caused the failure of several satellites when electrons became trapped in the
Earth's geomagnetic field. As a result of those failures, the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff
established hardening guidelines for all military satellites, including opemtional and
experimental ones. Ritter [1979] discusses these guidelines.
Studies were conducted by the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (formerly the
Defense Special Weapons Agency) [Webb, et al., 1995] on the possible effects of a
smaIl Third World nuclear burst (for example, 50 kT at 120 km altitude over the East
Asian Peninsula) on known commercial (unhardened) satellites. Satellites considered
included Hubble Space Telescope, Iridium, ORBCOMM, Globalstar, NOAA, and
Nimbus. These satellites showed lifetime reductions of 67% to as large as 99%.
It is important to consider survivability from the outset of mission design. For
example, if the satellite can function within a range of orbit altitudes, the highest of
these is both the hardest to attack and the most expensive to reach. We should consider
the system's survival in each of its life-cycle phases, including concept definition,
engineering design and development, and operations in orbit Note, however, that
historically we have not hardened launch systems because of cost and weight, as well
as undefined need. The main military threats against space systems are nuclear
weapons, including directed energy designs such as X-my lasers; ground- and spacebased laser weapons; high-velocity-pellet (fragmentation) weapons; high-power
mdio frequency (microwave) weapons; homing kinetic energy weapons; and beam
weapons using neutral atomic particles. We may use several approaches to make a
system survivable, with hardening of the satellite as a key element. Section 8.2.4
describes these possible approaches and discusses their approximate cost and relative
effectiveness.
8.2.1 The Nuclear Weapons Environment and Its Effect on Space Systems

Nuclear weapons pose the most severe threat to spacecraft or space systems. The
yield, or explosive power, and accuracy of delivery are such that if a nuclear weapon
directly attacks a spacecraft, ground station, or any other node of a space system, the
node will be destroyed. Nuclear weapon yields can range from a few tons to many
megatons of TNT equivalent (one kiloton of TNT is dermed to be 1012 calories). Future
nuclear exchanges could use yields of a few hundred kilotons to a few megatons,
depending on the purpose of the specific attack and the weapon's delivery accuracy.
Accurate delivery of low yields will achieve the desired kill probability, whereas less
accurate delivery requires higher yields.
.
Approximately 80% of the energy from a nuclear weapon detonated in space
appears in the form of X-mys. Other important effects include smaIl amounts of
gamma mys and neutrons, as well as smaIl fractions in residual mdioactivity and
kinetic energy of bomb debris. For additional technical detail on nuclear weapons
effects, see Glasstone and Dolan [1977].
X-Radiation. The X-radiation occurs because just after detonation, nuclear bomb
material is at 10-100 million K. As a first approximation, the hot bomb material will

8.2

Hardness and Survivability ReqnJrements

very quickly radiate the energy as though it were a black body, according to the StejtmBoltzmann's law:
E =aT4

(8-6)
where E is the energy in W1m2, T is the absolute temperature in K, and Gis the Stefan.Boltzmann's constant (5.67 x 10-8 W· nr2 • K-4). At higher black-body temperatmes,
more X-my photons are emitted at higher energies. (This is Wien's law, which states
that Amax T =constant, where Amax is the wavelength at maximum intensity and Tis
the absolute temperature of the blackbody.)
The X-ray fluence, Fx' at a distance R from a nuclear detonation of yield Y is given
by

Fx=/x Y/(41tR2)

. (8-7a)

=6.4YIR2

(8-8a)
where Ix is the fraction of the energy emitted as X-rays (= 0.8) and in the numerical
form Fx is in ca1/cm2, Y is in kilotons, and R is in km.
Neutron Radiation. One kiloton of equivalent nuclear' energy arises from the
fission of approxiinately 1.45 x 1023 nuclei. Each fission produces 2 or 3 neutrons.
Approximately half of these neutrons escape during the few tens of nanoseconds of
energy generation. Accordingly, the neutron fluence at a distance R em from a nucleax
detonation is given by

Fn =0.5 x 2.5 x 1.45 x I023Y/(47tR2)
(8-9)

where Y is in kilotons, R is in kID, and Fn is in n/em2• This equation is onlyapproximate. The actual neutron output will depend upon the design of the nuclear weapon.
Prompt Radiation. Gamma radiation emitted during the actual nuclear bum time
is prompt radiation, whereas gamma rays emitted after the nuclear bum time are
delayed radiation. Prompt gammas result from fission reactions, neutron capture, and
inelastic neutron scattering events occurring during intense generation of nuclear
energy. The total energy and energy distribution of the prompt gamma mys depend on
the nuclear weapon's specific design. To calculate preliminary survivability at range
R from a nuclear burst in space, we can express the dose, Dr, (energy deposited per
unit mass) in silicon semiconductor material from prompt gamma radiation as
Dr =4 x 105 y213IRlmds(Si)

(8-10)

where R is in km, Y is in megatons, and Dr is in mds (Si).
Delayed Radiation. Delayed gammas, neutrons, positrons, and electrons-or
residual mdiation-occur when radioactive fission products decay. For about the first
second after a nuclear explosion, the decay rate from residual nuclear radiation is
nearly constant Thereafter, the dose mte follows the approximate law:
R

= Ro(t/tO)-l.2

(8-11)

where R is the dose mte (usually in mdsIhr) at any elapsed time after the reference
time, ~o' when the dose mte was Ro. The fission products causing this dose mte contain
more than 300 different isotopes of 36 elements from the periodic table, so the inverse
1.2 power of time is an approximation. It is accurate to within 25% for the first
6 months after the nuclear explosion [Glasstone and Dolan, 1977].

224

Hardness and Survivability Requirements

The Space Environment and Survivability

The explosion energy rapidly disperses residual radiation. In the absence of an
atmosphere and geomagnetic fields, the radioactive fission products would expand
geometrically and decrease in intensity by the inverse square of the distance from the
burst. However, the geomagnetic field causes the mostly ionized, radioactive weapon
debris to spiral along geomagnetic field lines, in a manner similar to the chargedparticle motion descnDed in Sec. 8.1. Thus expansion of the radioactive debris will
depend on the magnetic field at the nuclear event and on the magnetic field's configuration between the nuclear event and· the satellite being considered. As a first
approximation, we can assume a geometric expansion. A more conservative approach,
however, would be to assume that the nuclear event and the satellite are on the same
geomagnetic field lines. The largest possible amount of radioactive debris would then
funnel from the nuclear event to the satellite.
An upper bound estimate of the delayed gamma flux due to radioactive debris, in
gammas or photons per square centimeter per second, from a single nuclear burst, is
given by

r = 9x10

1S

y I 41tR2 (1 + t)l.2

photons I cm 2 / s

225

several values of aluminum shielding. The dose scales linearly with time so the curves
can be used for longer or shorter durations. A polar orbit satellite will accumulate less
dose than an equatorial one because the trapped radiation is essentially nonexistent at
and near the geomagnetic poles of the Earth; this dose difference can be as large as a
factorof5.
OneYearTo1aI Dose-30 cIeg inclinations

I-

_100mDsAi

~

_200mDsAi

./'

_300mDsAi
.f~

\

Ii'

(8-12)

where Y is yield in megatons (one-third of total yield assumed to be fission), R is
distance from the burst point in kilometers, and t is time after burst in seconds [Goldflam, 1990]. This estimate applies to cases where the debris strikes and plates outer
surfaces of a satellite, as well as cases where the debris is far away. Similarly, an estimate of delayed beta debris can be made by applying a one-third factor to the equation.
Both delayed gammas and betas will manifest themselves as noise spikes in electrooptical and visible sensor elements used on satellite systems (such as infrared
surveillance sensors, optical/visible sensors, Earth sensors, and star trackers). The
delayed gammas are a significant threat to satellites, since they can be reduced only by
very thick shielding with high Z materials.
Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP). EMP is a secondary effect of nuclear weapon
detonations. X-rays and gamma rays impinging upon the upper atmosphere create an
electron flux which radiates in the RF region of the spectrum. EMP's spectral energy
is mostly in the 1 MHz to 100 MHz range. As the RF energy arrives at a satellite, it
will induce currents and voltages that may damage or kill the satellite if we do not
design to protect it Nominal electric field strengths, which satellites would experience, can vary from 3 to 100 Vim, depending on satellite altitude and burst location,
relative geometry, and other parameters.
System-Generated EMP, SGEMP, is a phenomenon caused when X-rays and
gamma rays hit a satellite or other system element, thereby creating an internal flux of
electrons whose electromagnetic interactions create large currents and voltages. These
large internal currents and voltages can damage sensitive components inside the satellite. Section 8.2.3 discusses how we can mitigate these effects.
Geomagnetkally Trapped Radiation. Following a nuclear burst at high altitude,
electrons caused by the weapon join the naturally occurring Van Allen radiation belts
(Sec. 8.1). The electron flux may increase by many orders of magnitude, thus increasing the absorbed dose in unshielded materials as the satellite repeatedly traverses the
Van Allen belts. To protect solid-state (silicon) electronic circuits, we normally
enclose them in aluminum, with wall thickness ranging from 0.0254 em (0.01 inch) to
a centimeter or more. Aluminum shielding with a thickness of 0.1 cm and a density of
2.71 g/cm3 corresponds to 0.27 g/cm2• Figure 8-9 of Sec. 8.1 gives the natural dose
rate in silicon, in rads per year, for polar orbits as a function of orbital altitude and for

10' 100

1,000

10,000

100,000

AltItude (Ion)

A. Natural total dose In one year, 30 deg Inclination circular orbits, for three values of
aluminum Shielding (0.254 cm, 0.508 cm, and 0.762 cm).

\.

\
105

100

1\
1,000

10,000

100.000

Circular Orbit AltItude (km)

B. Nuclear-enhanced electron dose In 30 days, 30 deg Inclination circular orbits, for one
value of aluminum shielding (0.254 cm).
Rg. 8-15.

Nuclear-enhanced Electron EnvIronment, 30 Days DuratIon. FIgure assumes
30 deg incnnation circular orbit and 0.1 inch aluminum shielding.

Figure 8-15B gives the dose resulting from a 30-day exposure to a nuclear weaponenhanced electron flux for one value of aluminum shielding and as a function of
orbital altitude. The dose for shorter periods can be estimated by linear scaling;
however, longer periods cannot be estimated by linear scaling since the saturated
environment deCays rapidly. As with the natural trapped electrons, the nuclear

226

The Splli:e Environment and Survivability

8.2

weapon-enhanced electron flux is practically nonexistent near the north and south
poles. For satellites with higher inclination orbits, i.e., greater than 60 to 70 deg, the
accumulated dose is greatly reduced, compared to satellites with inclinations of zero
to 60 or 70 deg.
An example will show how these calculations work in practice. Consider a satellite
which must operate for 1 year in the natural environment and then operate (survive)
for 1 day following a high altitude nuclear explosion which creates an electronenhanced Van Allen belt. We assume a circular orbit, 30 deg inclination and an
altitude of 6,000 km. For a wall thickness of 0.254 em (corresponding to a shielding
value of 0.69 g/cm2), Fig. 8-15A gives a dose of about 130 krads in 1 year. Figure
8-15B gives a dose of 21 Mrads for 30 days and 700 krads for 1 day. Adding the two,
we get 830 krads. The electronics must be able to function properly after accumulating
a total dose of this amount. Solid-state electronics can be hardened to tolerate from a
few krads to about 1 Mrad so our satellite, if hardened to 830 krads or more, would
satisfy the survivability requirement of 1 year natural plus 1 day weapon enhanced.
Nuclear Weapon Effects on Materials. The X-radiation pulse lasts tens of nanoseconds, and its energy is absorbed almost instantaneously in solid material through
the photoelectric effect and Compton scattering. In the photoelectric effect, bound
electrons of the material are ejected from their atomic orbits and take on a kinetic
energy equal to the difference between the energy of the incident photon and the
atom's ionization energy. The incident photon disappears in the photoelectric effect,
with its absorption per atom proportional to the 5th power ofZ, the atomic number of
the absorbing material, and inversely proportional to the 7/3 power of the incident
photon's energy [Heitler, 1954]. Therefore, high-Z materials shield against X-rays
more effectively, and the absorption cross section decreases dramatically for incidentphoton energy from 1 to 20 keY (1 keY =1.6 x 10-16 )).
Compton scattering is an elastic scattering event in which an electron -receives
some of the energy of the incident photon, and the incident photon changes direction.
As a result, the photon's energy decreases and its wavelength increases [Heitler,
1954]. The cross section per atom for Compton scattering is proportional to Z and, for
the range of photon energies we are interested in, is inversely proportional to the incident photon's energy. Therefore, for Compton scattering, increasing Z only slightly
increases the absorption coefficient, whereas the cross section decreases moderately
as the photon energy increases.
The energetic, free electrons described above can cause electronic circuits to
malfunction, and their energy ultimately appears as heat in the material. In fact, the
material heats rapidly enough to create shock waves which develop tensile stresses
that may cause spall at its unconstrained boundaries. H the deposited energy is high
enough (usually not the case at typical satellite fluence levels), the material may
vaporize or melt, creating direct damage in addition to the shock waves. For spacecraft, where flux or fluence levels are low, malfunction of electronic circuits is the
most likely occurrence.
Gamma rays resulting from nuclear explosions range from a few hundred keY to
several MeV. In preliminary designs, we can assume that gamma rays have a mean
energy of approximately 1 MeV and interact with matter primarily through Compton
scattering. Because gamma radiation is very penetrating, we cannot effectively shield
against it. Thus, when we wish to protect against the less penetrating, but more highly
ionizing, X-radiation, we need only provide enough shielding to reduce the prompt
dose to levels approximately equal to that of gamma radiation. FigUre 8-18 of

Hardness and Survivability Requirements

227

Sec. 8.2.3 gives the prompt dose induced by a unit fluence of X-radiation as a function
of additional shielding (the abscissa of the figure can be converted to linear dimensions
by dividing by the density of the shielding material). For higher or lower fluences,
linear scaling is appropriate.
Neutrons interact with material by colliding with atomic nuclei. The collisions
impart energy to the atoms of the material and displace the atoms from their normal
positions in the lattice. Changing the lattice structure can seriously harm solid-state
electronic devices because they depend on the characteristics of the lattice for their
function. At fluences greater than about 1012 nlcm2, neutrons can cause solid-state
devices to stop working, thus "electronically killing" a satellite.
Effects on Communications. A nuclear weapon detonated in space near the Earth
interacts strongly with the atmosphere and the Earth's magnetic field. The electromagnetic energy radiated from the detonation creates large-scale ionization in the bomb
material and in the atmosphere. Radioactive debris contributes beta particles
(positrons and electrons) from radioactive decay. The ionized bomb debris and beta
particles move along the lines of force of the geomagnetic field, as described in
Sec. 8.1. As the magnetic field lines enter the atmosphere, the energetic particles
interact with it, creating more ions and electrons. The free electrons thus created
absorb and reradiate RF energy and refract the electromagnetic waves of the radio
communications links between ground and satellite, creating phase and amplitude
changes. These in turn reduce the signal strength in radio receivers, thus interrupting
communications.
Based on the theory of electromagnetic propagation, the attenuation, a, in dB per
kID, is given by

a =4.4 x I()4Nevi «21r/'P + VZ) dBlkm
(8-13)
where Ne is the number of electrons per em3, v is the frequency of collision of electrons

with ions, atoms or molecules in Hz, and f is the frequency of the electromagnetic
radiation in Hz. The values of these parameters are difficult, if not impossible, to
obtain. However, the U.S. Defense Threat Reduction Agency (formerly the Defense
Special Weapons Agency) can provide computer programs for propagation analyses
in nuclear environments, assuming appropriate clearances and need to know can be
established.
For space-to-ground links, we can use the form of Eq. (8-13) and the fact that the
density distribution of the atmosphere is approximately exponential to infer the
absorptive behavior of RF signals as a function of frequency. The form of Eq. (8-13)
indicates that the absorption passes through a maximum as a function of collision
frequency, v, which is proportional to the density of air. Above approximately 80 km,
the density is so low that v is essentially zero and absorption does not occur. Below
about 60 km, electrons rapidly reattach to atoms and molecules, so the low electron
density again leads to small absorption. Therefore, the attenuation is at a maximum for
any given radiation frequency between 60 and 80 km. In this region the attenuation
varies with the inverse square of the radiation frequency. Thus, we should choose the
highest communication frequency we can to minimize attenuation due to nuclear
weapons environments. For a more complete treatment of nuclear effects on communications, see Mohanty [1991].
High data-rate requirements for military satellites with surveillance sensor payloads
and future commercial communications satellites have resulted in the use of opticall
laser links in modern systems. While having many advantages over RF links, such as

The Space Environment and Survivability

228

8.2

weight and power, opticalJink components are also affected by nuclear environments.
Table 8-6 contains general guidelines for the effects of nuclear radiation on optical1inIc
components.
TABLE 11-6. Radiation Effects on OpUcaJ Unk Components.
DeYlceType

Total Dose

Natural Van ADen belts,
man·made events
~ 100 krad,

Optical

polymer clad
slDca, 20 ·C, 0.85 tII't
0.02-0.5 dBlm loss (1-2
orders less loss at 1.5 pm).

Rbers

Neutron

Prompt Dose Rate

Man-made events
primarily

Man-Made Events with
short-term Irradiation times.

> 1014 n/crril for
0.02-0.5 dB/m loss.

Losses Increase 1-2 orders,
depending on dose, dose
rate, wavelength and
temperature. Nearly complete
annealing In S 24 hrs.

Transmitters 1-10 Mrad (up to 3.0 dB
light loss) for LEOs and
laser diodes, peak
wavelength shifts, threshold
current Increases, beam
pattern distorts, power loss.

1012 _1014 n/crril for
LEOs (threshold)
1013-1015 n/crril for
laser diodes (threshold).
Ught output loss and
peak wavelength shifts.

Detectors

Decrease In responsMty of
1~% at 10 Mrad.
Dark current Increase of
1-2 orders at 10-100 Mrads
(for 81 PIN photodlodes,
worse for APDs, better for
AlGaAslGaAs pholodlodes)

Displacement
damage thresholds of
_1014 n/crril for 81 PIN
pholodlodes and _1012
for APOs. Dark current
increases, responsMty
decreases.

Dark current Increases
Unearly up to _1010 radsls.
False signal generation by
radiation pulse. Upset at
~ 107 rads/s. Burnout at
~ 1Q9 radsls. APOs much
more sensitive than PIN
photodlodes.

Opto-

Depends on device and
device technology.

Depends on device and
device technology.

Depends on device and
device technology. Circuit
upset and burnout possible.

modulators

Ionization Induced bumout

at 1Q9-1 010 radsls.
Pulsed lasers tum-on delays
are up to 100 ns.
Power loss, wavelength
shifts.

NOTES:
OptIcal

Fibers

• Damage worse and annealing slower for lower temperatures. Losses generally lower for Increasing
wavelength (to 1.5 pm)
• Polymer clad sUice cores have lowest losses but losses Incraase below - 20 ·C. Max dose usage 01
_107_1OS rads

TransmItlers

Hardness and Survivability Requirements

where P is the average output power, D is the laser objective diameter, Q is the qna1ity
of the laser beam (dimensionless), A. is the wavelength of the laser, J is the angular
jitter of the beam (in rad), and R is the range from the laser to the target. Q =1 indicates
a diffraction-limited weapon; laser weapons being developed will have a beam quality
of 1.5 to 3.0. Both pulsed and continuous-wave lasers are in development. Equation
(8-14) is for a continuous-wave laser, but is approximately correct for the average flux
from a pulsed laser. The peak flux for a pulsed laser will be much higher.
For engagement ranges of several hundred km, the laser spot sizes will be several
meters in diameter and will, in general, completely engulf the target satellite in laser
radiation. To damage or kill a satellite at any range, the laser beam must hold steady
long enough to achieve a damaging or killing level. Depending on the incident flux
level and sensitivity, this dwell time could be several seconds or minutes.
Fragmentation or Pellet Weapons. The fonner Soviet Union operated an
antisatellite weapon using fragmentation pellets that could attack satellites in lowEarth orbit [U.S. Congress, OTA, 1985]. This weapon, launched from ground
locations, achieved an orbit with nearly the same elements as those of the target satellite. Hence we call it a co-orbital antisatellite system. Radar or optical guidance brings
the weapon close to the target satellite. A high explosive then creates many small
fragments which move rapidly toward the target satellite and damage or kill it by
impact
High-Power Microwave Weapons. These weapons generate a beam ofRF energy
intense enough to damage or interfere with a satellite's electronic systems. Their frequencies of operations range from 1 to 90 GHz, thereby covering the commonly used
frequencies for command, communication, telemetry, and control of most modem
satellites. A satellite's antenna tuned to receive a frequency the weapons radiate will
amplify the received radiation. Thus, it could damage RF amplifiers, downconverters,
or other devices in the front end of a receiver.
Neutral-Particle-Beam Weapons. Particle accelerators have been used for highenergy nuclear physics research since the early 1930s, so the technology is well
developed. Weapons using this technology must be based in space because the
particles cannot penetrate the atmosphere. The particles would be accelerated as negative hy4rogen or deuterium ions, then neutralized by stripping an electron as they
emerge from the accelerator. (The particles must be electrically neutral to avoid being
deflected by the Earth's magnetic field).

• At higher temperatures, threshold current and peak wavelength Increase while output power decreases for

laser dfodes
• LEOs have beller temperatureJIemporai stabDlly, longer lifetimes, greater renabDily and lower cost
Detectors
• APDs are predlcted to be more sensitive than PIN diodes to total dose, neutrons and dose rate
• AlGaAslGaAs pholodtodes shown to be more radiation resistant than hard PIN photocIlodes

8.2.3 Spacecraft HardenIng

8.2.2 Other Hostile Environments
Laser Weapons. High-power lasers are being developed as potential ground-based
or space-based antisatellite weapons. The flux in power per cross-sectional area from
these weapons is given by

(8-14)

Hardening of a space system's elements is the single most effective action we can
take to make it inore survivable. Presently, we use hardening to prevent electronics
upset or damage from nuclear-weapon effects. In the 2000s, we will see laser hardening in military satellites which must survive hostile attacks. If projected antisatellite
weapons are developed and deployed, hardening will help reduce the effects of HighPower Microwave and Neutral-Particle-Beam weapons on satellites.
Figure 8-16 gives approximate upper and lower bounds on the weight required to
harden a satellite to nuclear weapons effects. The technology for hardening satellites
against nuclear weapons is well developed up to a few tenths of cal/cm2. Above these
levels, the hardening weight increases sharply, as Fig. 8-16 illustrates. Figure 8-17
gives rough upper and lower bounds on hardening costs. Comparable cost data may be
found in Webb and Kweder [1998].

The Space Environment and SurvivabDity

230

Hardness and Survivability Requirements

231

In most cases, shielding of the X-radiation can reduce the internal dose to manageable levels. Figure 8-18 gives the prompt dose in silicon shielded by the basic
O.04O-inch aluminum enclosure plus a range of additional tantalum shielding in g1emz .
We can use this figure to estimate the extra tantalum weight required to shield against
the prompt dose. The procedure is as follows:

6

11111 III"""

~I~~r~

/
~

Lower Bound

111111111 I

o
10-5

10-4

10-3

10-2

10-1

10

Hardness Level (callcm2)

Rg. 8-16.

Weight Required to Harden a SateDIte as Percent of SateDIte Weight.

For X-rays with photon energy below 3 keV, shielding is very effective with almost
any convenient material, such as aluminum. At higher photon energies, materials with
higher atomic numbers, Z, are more effective than the low-Z materials. A commonly
used shielding material is tantalum because of its aVailability and ease of manufacture.
A satellite's external surfaces are particularly vulnerable to crazing, cracking, delamination, or micro-melting. Therefore, we must carefully select materials for these
surfaces to protect functions such as thermal control, optical transmission, or reflection. In this category are covers for solar cells, optical coatings on lenses and thermal
control mirrors, thermal control paints, metal platings, and optical elements made of
quartz or glass. The data for typical satellite materials exposed in underground nuclear
tests is, in general, classified.

8

il l II """
I~p~rl~~
I--'"

lI--

o
10-8

10-4

Lower

10-3

10-2

10-1

un

10

Hardness Level (callcm2)

Rg. 8-17.

Cost to Harden a SateIDte as a Percent of Total SateIDte Cost. Costs Include
production cost plus proportional share of engineering costs.

Prompt dose results from penetrating X-radiation and, to a lesset'-extent, from
prompt gamma. Typically, the X-ray prompt dose is 3 to 4 orders of magnitude larger
than the dose from prompt gamma. At typical spacecraft levels, prompt dose can break
the bonds of the leads on susceptible integrated circuits and caD cause electronic
circuits to experience burnout, latchup, and temporary upset.

101~--L---~--~--~

o

0.5

1.5

__~__-L__~

2

2.5

3

3.5

ThIckness (g/cm2)

Fig. 8-18.

Prompt Dose as a Function of Additional Tantalum Shielding (Worst Case
1-15 keY Spectrum).

• Using Fig. 8-18, scale the maximum allowable prompt dose by the fluence
appropriate to the system under consideration and determine the surface mass
density (gIcm2) required;
• Multiply the surface mass density required by the total area to be shielded on
the satellite.
The total dose is the sum of the ionizing dose from all sources of radiation and is
usually expressed in rads (Si). In almost all cases, the total dose is dominated by
trapped electrons in the geomagnetic field. Figure 8-19 giveS the dose in silicon as a
function of thickness of shielding material in g1cm2, normalized to an incident 1 MeV
electron fluence of 1014 electronslcm2• The asymptotic nature of the dose curve for
large mass densities results from the bremsstrahlung electrons produce as they stop in
the shielding material. Thus, we would shield interactively for total dose and prompt
dose. The prompt dose shielding also attenuates the radiation from the Van Allen belts,
and the extra aluminum needed to attenuate the VanAllen belt radiation also·
attenuates the prompt X-radiation. For example, as Fig. 8-18 shows, an aluminum box
0.102 em thick can reduce an external prompt dose of 3 x lOS rads (Si)' cal-I. em2 to
an internal dose of 4 x lOS rads (Si)' caJ.-I. em2 • We can reduce the prompt dose even
further by adding more high-Z material, such as tantalum or tungsten as shown in
Fig. 8-18. This high-Z material also reduces the dose caused by trapped electrons, as
mentioned above.
Metals are relatively unaffected by total dose. However, total dose degrades certain
properties of organic materials, beginning between 0.1 and 1 Mrad, and makes them
unusable above 10 to 30 Mrad. For example, organic materials may· soften, become
brittle, or lose tensile strength. NASA [1980J and Bolt and Carroll [1963J give data on
how the total dose affects organic materials. Figure 8-20 shows the "sure-safe" total
dose capabilities for commonly used satellite materials.

The Space Environment and Survivability

232

Hardness and Survivability Requirements

8.2

233

Radiation hardened parts are required for all designs that must operate in nuclear
weapon environments, but some commercial communications satellites can consider
using radiation tolerant parts (<50 krads capability) or even commercial off the shelf
(COTS) Class B type parts (1~15 krads capability), particularly if they will only
operate in low-Earth orbits (less than about 1,000 km) and have orbital design
lifetimes of 2 to 3 years maximum. Table 8-7 shows a comparison of typical unhardened COTS parts and hardened parts capabilities.
TABLE 8-7. COTS and Rad Hard Parts Comparison. Rad hardening increases radiation
protection signiflcantiy. thus increasing spacecraft survivability.
1()3

L..-_....I...._--'_ _...L..-_---'-_ _-'--_-..l

o
Rg.8-19.

0.5

1.5
2
Shield Materlal- g/cm2

2.5

Characteristics

3

Dose from Trapped Electron Ruence of 1014 Electronslcm2 as a Function of
ThIckness of Shielding Material In glcm2.
Fused Glass

..

.. Teflon (FEP) ~

~

+--+

BakelIte

RadHard

1()3...1 ()4 rads

10S-1()6 rads

Dose-Rate Upset

10S-1()8 rads (Si)/s

>109 rads (Si)/s

Dose-Rate-Induced Latchup

107-109 rads (Si)/s

>1012 rads (Si)/s

Neutrons

1011-1013 nlcm2

1014-1015 nlcrn2

Single-Event Upset (SEU)

10-3-10-7 errors/bit-day

1o-B-1 0-10 errors/bit-day

Single-Event LatchuplSlngleEvent Burnout (SEUSEB)

< 20 MeV-crn2/mg (LET)

37-80 MeV-crn2/mg (LET)

CaJbon

Teflon (PTFE)

COTS

Total Dose

• COTS chaJacleristics may vary unpredlclably from 101 to 101 and even within a lot
• Higher margins and more testing (screening) are required with COTS usage. which wID offset lower piece part costs.
• LET Is Llnear Energy Transfer threshold

10 7

108

RadIatIon Dose [rads (Sl)l

Rg. 8-20.

Total Dose Capabilities of Satellite Materials.

Silicon electronic devices suffer decreases in operating parameters such as gain,
gate voltage, or lifetime of the minority carrier. We can measure these operating
parameter changes as a function of dose and develop curves of radiation deratings.
Thus, during circuit design. these radiation deratings are used to ensure that the
devices will continue to operate satisfactorily at the design exposure level.
Total dose also includes the ionization from prompt and delayed weapon radiation,
as well as neutron-generated radiation. To the total dose from man-made sources of
hostile radiation, we must add radiation from the natural environments. The total dose
depends on the amount of shielding, orbital parameters, and satellite life. In the
absence of nuclear-weapon detonations, the total dose will normally increase linearly
with time on orbit. To harden a satellite against these effects, we would use siliconbased electronic devices which tolerate the effects and shield them to the appropriate
level, depending on how long we want the satellite to last. In the future, we will
increase the use of electronic devices based on gallium arsenide, because gallium
arsenide appears to be unusually immune to total dose effects.

Whether designing satellite electronics with RAD Hard or COTS parts, a Radiation
Hardness Assurance Control Plan (RHACP) is necessary to specify radiation design
requirements, parts derating methods, required design margins, parts testing requirementS and the process for controlling all activities related to radiation hardness. Implementation of the RHACP will help ensure the success of the hardness design and
hardness verification process. The hardware is normally hardness qualified at an
appropriate level, either piece part, unit, subsystem or system, whichever is economically and technically correct.
Displacement fluence is any electromagnetic or particulate radiation which displaces atoms from their normal lattice positions. For nuclear weapons, neutron fluence
is the primary cause of displacement. In the natural environment, electrons and protons
are the principal contributors. The displaced atoms and their vacancies will react with
the bulk material and form stable defects in the lattice structure. These defects
significantly chaJige the equilibrium-carrier concentration and minority-carrier lifetime. In silicon solar cells, these changes degrade power output. In other solid-state
electronic devices, they reduce gain and increase forward voltage drop and reverse
leakage currents.
We cannot harden to the neutron displacement fluence from a nuclear burst by
shielding because the uncharged neutron is very penetrating and large amounts of
shielding would be needed. In general, we harden to the neutron fluence by selecting
devices that resist degradation by neutrons.
To protect against displacement by electrons or protons, we must shield the solidstate devices. Solar cells are shielded by a layer of fused silica, varying in thickness
with the amount of shielding required. At very high ionization dose, the cover glass
material darkens, reducing the solar array's power output. For solid-state devices

234

The Space Environment and Survivability

8.2

contained inside aluminum boxes, we choose the thickness of the aluminum to stop the
electrons and ignore the protons, which penetrate much less in most commonly used
orbits.
Delayed beta radiation flux can also be shielded effectively in the same manner as
total dose, since it is composed of electrons. In contrast, delayed gamma flux cannot
be shielded easily due to its high energy content (up to about 12 MeV). As an example,
a factor of 10 reduction requires about 1.1 inches (2.8 cm) of high Z material like tungsten or tantalum. Mitigation of gainma debris noise spikes in sensor systems will
require heavy shielding and/or pulse suppression signal processing (such as time delay
integration), or even complementary satellite tasking. Even then, the gamma noise can
still be high enough to cause sensor outages lasting from seconds to minutes, depending on specific sensor performance characteristics and design. For example, a fairly
robust sensor with an operational capability (noise threshold plus signal to noise ratio)
of 1()9 photonslcm2 /s will be "blind" for about 34 sec, given a 1 megaton burst at
100 km away from the satellite, using Eq. (8-12).
EMP is typically in the MHz range. At satellite altitudes, EMP intensities of a few
V1m can easily cause damage and upset in unhardened satellites. To prevent this, Faraday shields can keep the radiation from entering the satellite cavities. We can also use
good external grounding, interconnect all conducting parts and surfaces, employ surge
arrestors, and eliminate sensitive components. In addition, designing for electromagnetic compatibility, such as shielding of cables and harnesses, will reduce or eliminate
much of the potential for EMP damage. Computers are particularly sensitive to EMP,
as are the following components (in order of decreasing sensitivity): semiconductor
diodes in microwave applications, field-effect transistors, RF transistors, siliconcontrolled rectifiers, audio transistors and semiconductor diodes in power rectifier
applications.
SGEMP occurs when the incident flux of photons, both X-ray and gamma ray,
creates a flux of electrons inside the satellite. Some of the energetic electrons are not
stopped in solid material but emerge into satellite cavities, causing currents and fields
within these cavities. At representative satellite fluence levels, these electrons can generate cable injection currents of 10-100 amperes/meter of cable length and peak cavity
electric fields of several hundred kilovolts/meter. The fields then couple electroinagnetic energy into cables and other conductive elements in the cavity, and the sharp
pulse of energy transmitted to sensitive components can make them fail.
SGEMP hardening uses the same methods as EMP hardening except for external
shielding, because SGEMP generates inside the satellite. We can also treat internal
surfaces with low-Z (atomic number) paints to reduce electron emission into cavities.
Using specially designed low-response cables will also reduce SGEMP effects.
Finally, we can protect input/output circuits and terminals with various deviceszener diodes, low-pass filters, and bandpass filters-to limit current or to clamp
voltage.
The natural space phenomena causing single event upsets (SEUs) and other singleevent effects (SEEs), as well as methods for predicting upset rates, were addressed in
Sec. S.1.5. Because shielding is ineffective in reducing SEEs, satellite systems must
be designed to mitigate these effects, given that they will occur. Table 8-S lists some
classical approaches used in modem space system design. The extent to which these
approaches are applied depends on the mission criticality, system upset specifications
(allowable rates and outage times), and orbital environment expected. However, as
indicated in the table, selection of acceptable parts is perhaps the single most important

r

Hardness and Survivability Requirements

8.2

235

of all approaches for SEE mitigation, albeit not sufficient by itself. Not indicated in
Table 8-8 is the effect of orbital altitude. While geosynchronous altitude is the worst
case for SEES (due to galactic cosmic rays), orbits that traverse the proton belt (elliptical orbits and those between about 1,200 km and 8,000 km altitude) will have SEEs
from high energy protons, in addition to galactic cosmic rays, and the proton SEUs can
be 10 times worse.
TABLE 8-8. Single-Event Effects. The effects caused by single events can be reduced by
better parts, improved shielding, and process redundancy.
Approach
1. Parts Selection:
• Error rate < 1O-S errorslbit-day
• Latchup immunity to LET ~37 MeV-cm2/mg
• MOSFET SEGRISEB immunity to LET ~ 37
• Derate power MOSFET to 30-40% of Vos
2. Use parity and SEeDED

Comments
• < 10-10 desired
• LET ~ 60-120 desired
• LET ~ 60-80 desired
• Vos Is rated drain to source voltage

Single error correction, double error
detection

3. Use duai or redundant logic for critical functions 2 correct outputs for decision making
4. Use watchdog timers and triple modular redun- 2 out of 3 voting logic used; switching to
dancy (TMR) in spacecraft control processor. spare processor after repeated tiineouts
5. Periodic refreshing of critical memories

Periodic switchover to refreshed memory
bank

6. Use of hard latches

Bimlnate soft error responses

7. Design digital circuits immune to analog circuit Long response time compared to spike
spikes
transient
8. Eliminate nonrecoverable system modes and
failures that could result from a soft error
(bit flip)

Good design practice always required to

ensure no damage and recoverable modes

Note: LET Is Ilnear energy transfer threshold; SEGRISEB Is slngJe-event gate rupturelslngle-ewn1 burnoul

Surface charging and resultant electrostatic discharge (ESD) due to space plas~
were addressed briefly in Sec 8.1.4, including basic design guidelin~ for s~telbte
survivability. Satellites that are highly exposed to electrons (those at high altitudes,
geosynchronous and highly elliptical orbits) mnst also be designed to survive bulk
charging, in which electrons embedded in bulk dielectri~ (~ble dielectric~ an~ circuit
boards) and isolated conductors (such as ungrounded ctrcwt board metallizations and
spot shields on parts) build up potentials sufficient to cause ~scharges. ~uch discharges can result in anomalous upset and/or damage to electromcs, much like SEUs,
discussed in the preceding paragraph.
Much of the work on bulk charging is summarized by Vampola [1996], based on
CRRES flight data. Mitigation approaches are indicated in Table 8-9. Designers can
eliminate most bulk charging concerns simply by providing sufficient shielding to
reduce both maximum current on circuit boards to less than 0.1 x 10-12 ampslem2 and
maximum total integrated fluence to less than 3 x 1()9 electronslcm2 on un~u~
locaIized spot shields [Frederickson et al., 1992]. For geosynchronous satellites, this
shielding is about 0305 em of total equivalent aluminum (which is typically provided
for total dose protection).

The Space Environment and Survivability

8.2

TABLE 8-9. Bulk Charging Mitigation Approaches. Careful planning can produce adequate
solutions without large Investments of time and money.
Implementation

Approach
Prevent/on

Use leaky dielectrics and bleed-off paths with < 1()9 ohms resistance to
ground (at least 2 ground paths for contiguous areas >64.5 cm2)
Double shielded wire harness and cables
Adequate shielding (-0.305 cm aluminum) of circuit boards and part
shields (vs. grounding of aD metaDlzations and local part shields).

Signal Response
Conditioning

Design circuits to be unresponsive to the relatively short, low level
spurious ESO pulses which are typlcaDy less than 100 ns.

CIrcuit Hardness

Circuits should be designed for no damage by ESO pulses with energy
levels up to 10 mlcrojouJes.

8.2.4 Strategies for Achieving Survivability

As described in Sec. 8.2.3 and summarized in Table 8-10, hardening is the single
most effective survivability option. Table 8-11 presents other strategies for enhancing
survivability. We use redundant nodes, also called proliferation or multiple satellites,
to overlap satellite coverages. Thus, if one satellite fails, others will perform at least a
part of the total mission. An attacker must use multiple attacks to defeat the space system--a costly and therefore more difficult approach for the enemy. The development
of the so-called lightsat technology-light, inexpensive satellites performing limited
functions-will support this strategy. To be effective, each node (ground station or
satellite) must be separated from another node by a large enough distance to prevent a
single attack from killing more than one node.
TABLE 8-10. Space Survivability Hardening Design Summary. Though the space environment is harsh, survivability can be designed Into spacecraft subsystems.

Hardness and Survivability Requirements

8.2

Prior to the end of the Cold War, fixed ground control stations were high priority
targets of ICBM-launched nuclear weapons. Therefore, satellites needed to be autonomous or capable of being controlled by multiple mobile ground control stations, or
utilize a combination of the two survivability features. In the Post-Cold War era, these
survivability features are less importanL Nevertheless, the following principles of
survivability are still relevanL Mobile ground stations are survivable because ICBMs
cannot find targets whose Earth coordinates are unknown and continually changing.
By deploying mobile ground stations so they are separate from one another, we allow
a single nuclear weapon to kill, at most, one ground station.
TABLE 8-11. SatellHe System Survivability Options. Many options exist, each adding cost
and design complexity.
Option

Cost"

EffecUveness

Requirement DrIver

Features

Sate/Dt9
Hardening

2-5%

Very good

Trapped electron shielding, prompt radiation
shielding, latchup screening, radiation-tolerant
electronics, degraded electronic parIS deratlngs

Redundant
Nodes

Cost of extra

Good

Essential functions performed by 2 or more
nodes (e.g., sateDites with overlapping
coverage but separated by greater than 1 lethal
diameter range)

Onboard
Decoys

1-100/0

Good, depending
upon type of threat
guidance

Credible decoys simulating both radar and
optical signatures of the satellite; decoys are
launched when an attack Is detected (detection
system required)

Maneuver

1(~20%

Good, depending
upon type of threat
guidance

Thrust levels depend on satellite altitude
(warning time), nature of threat, threat detection
efficiency; additional satellite weight for high
acceleration

Self
Defense

20-400/0

Very good

Escort

Cost of 1 sat

node

Capabllfty

Kinetic energy kin homlng missiles rapresent
most likely first system

Very good

Defense

Threat Type

237

Mitigation Design Approach

Kinetic kID homlng mlsslles represent most
likely first system; directed energy (e.g., highenergy laser or high-power mlcrowave system)
Is future possIbDity

-Natural Space
Radiation
Enhanced Radiation
from Nuclear Bursts

WIthstand total dose degradation. Radiation resistant materials, optics,
detectors and electronics. Shielding
Minimize slngle-event upsets
(SEU)
at unit & part levels. Self-correcting
features for SEU tolerance.

Autonomous 3--8%
Operations

Provides protection
Autonomous orbit control (e.g., statlon-keeplng
against loss of ground for geosynchronous orbits). momentum control,
station
redundant unit control (fault detection) and
substitution

Collateral Nue/ear

WIthstand prompt X-ray, neutron,
EMP damage, minimize dose rate
upsets. Tolerate Induced noise
due to debris.

MabUe
Ground
Control
Stations

Very good; provides
Multiple mobne ground control stations; whUe
survivable ground
one Is controlling, one Is tearing down, one Is
control station network sattlng up, and one Is changing Its location;
survivabDity Is achieved by physical location

Burst

Redout

Sensor tolerance to background
levels.

Radiation resistant materials, optics,
detectors & electronics. High Z
shielding, current IImltlng/terrnlnal
protection. Event detection,
circumvention, recovery. SensOr
noise suppression. Multiple satellite
coverages.
Processing algorithms. Multiple
satelrltes for detection.

Ground Based Laser Sensortolerance to Interference or 2 color sensor detection, filtering
damage.
and processing.
High Power
Sensor and communications
Protection of detectors and circuits,
MIcrowave and EMP tolerance to Interference/damage. processing for noise discrimination.
RF
Jammlng!Blackout

Communications tolerance to
interference/scintillation.

Multiple links, processlng,
modulation and frequency choices.

2to3t1mes
cost of large
grnd. stat

uncertainty.

Surv.MabUe 20....30% of
Very good; provides
Gmd. Term. fixed tennlnal Iow-cost groundcontrol optiont

Hardened against hlgh-altltude EMP, nuclear
bioi0gicai chemical warfare, jamming, small
arms fire. Survivablf'Jty enhanced by physical
location uncertainty.

Onboard
Attack
Reporting
System

System records/reports time, Intensity, or

1-5%

EssentIal for total
system survivabDity

'Percent of total sateDlte cost.
tsurvlvable with min. essential com. connectivity.

direction of all potentially hostile events (e.g.,
RF,laser, nuclear, peDet impacts, and spoofing
or takeover attempts); allows appropriate
military response to hostilities

238

The Space Enm-omnent and Survivability

Hardness and Survivability Requirements

Onboard systems for attack reporting tell ground-control stations that a satellite is
being attacked and what the attack parameters are. Without such information, ground
operators may assume a spacecraft fault or natural accident has occurred, rather than
an attack. Thus, controllers could act incorrectly or fail to act when necessary. More
importantly, national command authorities need timely information telling of any
attack on our space assets.
Decoys are an inexpensive way to blunt an antisatellite attack. They simulate the
satellite's optical or RF signature and deploy at the appropriate moment, thus diverting
the attack toward the decoys. Decoys must be credible (provide a believable radar or
optical simulation of the satellite) and must properly sense an attack to know the
precise moment for the most effective deployment We can also defeat a homing antisatellite by including optical or RF jammers to nullify or confuse its homing system.
Such jammers weigh little and, depending on how well we know the parameters of the
homing system, can be very effective.
A satellite can maneuver, or dodge, an antisatellite attack if it has thrusters for that
purpose. Of course, almost every satellite has thrusters for attitude control and orbit
changes. Thrusters for maneuvers are more powerful, generating higher accelerations
and causing the need for stiffer, stronger solar arrays or other appendages. These extra
requirements lead to weight penalties. In addition, we must supply more propellant,
trading off the increased propellant weight against the increased survivability.
A satellite can defend itself against an antisatellite attack if that capability is
included in the design. One possible approach is to include a suite of optical or radar
sensors and smaIl, lightweight missiles. The sensors would detect the onset of an
attack, determine approximate location and velocity of the attacker, and launch the
self-guided, homing missiles to kill the attacker. Of course, we would have to consider
weight, power, inertial properties, and other design factors, but a self-defense system
is a reasonable way to help a high-value spacecraft survive. Alternatively, we could
deploy an escort satellite carrying many more missiles and being much more able to
detect, track, and intercept the antisatellite attack. An escort satellite would cost more
than active defense on the primary satellite, but the latter's weight and space limitations may demand it

Frederickson, A.R., E.G. Holeman, and E.G. Mullen. 1992. "Characteristics of Spontaneous Electrical Discharging of Various Insulators in Space Radiations." IEEE
Transactions on Nuclear Science, vol. 39, no. 6.

References

McDwain, C.E. 1961. ''Coordinates for Mapping the Distribution of Magnetically
Trapped Particles." J. Geophys. Res. 66:3681-3691.

Bilitza, D., D.M. Sawyer, and J.H. King. 1988. "Trapped Particle Models at NSSDC/WDC-A." in Proceedings o/the Workshop on Space Environmental Effects on
Materials. ed. BA. Stein and LA. Teichman. Hampton, VA.
Bolt, Robert O. and James G. Carroll, eds. 1963. Radiation Effects on Organic Materials. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Defense Nuclear Agency. 1972. Transient Radiation Effects on Electronics (TREE)
Handbook. DNA H-1420-1. March 2.
DeWitt, Robert N., D. Duston, and A.K. Hyder. 1993. The Behavior 0/Systems in the
Space Environment. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Fennell, J.P., H.C. Koons, M.S. Leung, and P.P. Mizera. 1983. A Review 0/ SCATHA
Satellite Results: Charging and Discharging. ESA SP-198. Noordwijk, The Netherlands: European Space Agency.
Feynman, J., T. Armstrong, L. Dao-Gibner, and S. Silverman. 1988. "A New Proton
Fluence Model for E>1O MeV." in Interplanetary Particle Environment, ed.
J. Feynman and S. Gabriel, 58-71. Pasadena, CA: Jet Propulsion Laboratory.

239

Glasstone, S. and PJ. Dolan. 1977. The Effects 0/ Nuclear Weapons (3rd edition).
Washington, DC: u.S. Departments of Defense and Energy.
Goldflam, R. 1990. "Nuclear Environments and Sensor Performance Analysis." Mission Research Corp. Report MRC-R-1321, October 4, 1990.
Gussenhoven, M.S., D.A. Hardy, F. Rich, WJ. Burke, and H.-C. Yeh. 1985. ''High
Level Spacecraft Charging in the Low-Altitude. Polar Auroral Environment"
J. Geophys. Res. 90:11009.
Hastings, D. and H. Garrett 1996. Spacecraft-Environment Interactions. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Hedin,A.E.1986. ''MSIS-86 Thermospheric Model." J. Geophys.Res. 92:4649-4662.
Heitler, Walter. 1954. The Quantum Theory o/Radiation (3rd edition). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Jacchia, L.G. 1977. Thermospheric Temperature, Density and Composition: New
Models. Spec. Rep. 375. Cambridge, MA: Smithsonian Astrophysical Observ.
Jursa, A.S., ed. 1985. Handbook o/Geophysics and the Space Environment, Bedford,
MA: Air Force Geophysics Laboratory.
King, J.H. 1974. "Solar Proton Fluences for 1977-1983 Space Missions." J. Spacecraft and Rockets. 11:401.
Konradi, A. and A.C. Hardy. 1987. "Radiation Environment Models and the Atmospheric Cutoff." J. Spacecraft and Rockets. 24:284.
Leger, LJ., J.T. Visentine, and J.P. Kuminecz. 1984. ''Low Earth Orbit Oxygen
Effects on Surfaces." Paper presented at AIAA 22nd Aerospace Sciences Meeting,
Reno, NV, January 9-12.

Mohanty, N., ed. 1991. Space Communication and Nuclear Scintillation. New York:
Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Mullen, E.G., M.S. Gussenhoven, and H.B. Garrett 1981.A "Worst-Case" Spacecraft
Environment as Observed by SCATHA on 24 April 1979. AFGL-TR-81-0231,
Hanscom Air Force Base, MA: Air Force Geophysics Laboratory.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration. 1980. Nuclear and Space Radiation
Effects on Materials, NASA SP-8053. June 1980.
NOAA1National Environmental Satellite, Data and Information Service. 1991.
Monthly Mean 2800 MHz Solar Flux (Observed) Jan. 1948-Mar. 1991. Solar-Geophysical Data prompt reports. Boulder, CO: National Geophysical Data Center.
Petersen, EL. 1995. "SEE Rate Calculation Using the Effective Flux Approach and a
Generalized Figure of Merit Approximation." IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 42,
no. 6, December 1995.

240

The Space Environment and Survivability

8.2

r

Purvis, C.K., H.B. Garrett, A.C. Whittlesey, and N.J. Stevens. 1984. Design Guidelines for Assessing and Controlling Spacecraft Charging Effects. NASA Technical
Paper 2361.
Ritter, James C. 1979. ''Radiation Hardening of Satellite Systems." J. Defense
Research (classified Secret Restricted Data), vol. II, no. 1.
Robinson, P.A. 1989. Spacecraft Environmental Anomalies Handbook. GL-TR-890222. Hanscom Air Force Base, MA: Air Force Geophysics Laboratory.
Schulz, M. and L.J. Lanzerotti. 1974. Particle Diffusion in the Radiation Belts. Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.
Tascione, T. 1994. Introduction to the Space Environment (2nd Edition}. Malabar, FL:
Orbit Book Company.
TRW, Inc. 1998. Spacecraft Hardening Design Guidelines Handbook. Vulnerability
and Hardness Laboratory. September 1998.
Tribble, A.C. 1995. The Space Environment: Implications for Spacecraft Design.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Tribble, A.C., B. Boyadjian, J. Davis, J. Haffner, and E. McCullough. 1996.

Contamination Control Engineering Design Guidelines for the Aerospace Community. NASA CR 4740. May 1996.
.
Tsyganenko, N .A. 1987. "Global Quantitative Models of the Geomagnetic Field in the
Cislunar Magnetosphere for Different Disturbance Levels." Planet. Space Sci.
35:1347.
U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment. September 1985. Anti-Satellite
Weapons, Countermeasures, and Arms Control, OTA-ISC-281.Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office.
Vampola, A.L., P;F. Mizera, H.C. Koons and J.F. Fennell. 1985; The Aerospace
Spacecraft Charging Document. SD-TR-85-26, EI Segundo, CA: U.S. Air Force
Space Division.
Vampola, A.L. 19%. ''The Nature of Bulk Charging and Its Mitigation in Spacecraft
Design." Paper presented at WESCON, Anaheim, CA, October 22-24.
Vette, J.I., A.B. Lucero and lA. Wright. 1966. Models of the Trapped Radiation
Environment, Vol. II: Inner and Outer Zone Electrons. NASA SP-3024.
Visentine, J.T. ed. 1988. Atomic Oxygen Effects Measurements for Shuttle Missions
STS-8 and 4I-G, vols. I-ill. NASA TM-l00459.
Walterscheid, R.L. 1989. "Solar Cycle Effects on the Upper Atmosphere: Implications
for Satellite Drag." J. Spacecraft and Rockets. 26:439-444.
Webb, R.C., L. Palkuti, L. Cohn, G. Kweder, A. Constantine. 1995. ''The Commercial
and Military Satellite Survivability Crisis." J. Defense Electronics. August
Webb, R.C., G. Kweder. 1998. "Third World Nuclear Threat to Low Earth Orbit
Satellites." Paper presented at GOMAC, Arlington, VA, 1&-19 March 1998.

Chapter 9
Space Payload Design and Sizing
Bruce Chesley, U.S. Air Force Academy
Reinhold Lutz, Daimler Chrysler Aerospace
Robert F. Brodsky, Microcosm, Inc.
9.1 Payload Design and Sizing Process
9.2 Mission Requirements and Subject Trades

Subject Trades
9.3 Background
The Electromagnetic Spectrum; Basic Telescope Optics;
Diffraction limited Resolution
9.4 Observation Payload Design
Candidate Sensors and Payloads; Payload Operations
Concept; Required Payload Capability
9.5 Observation Payload Sizing
Signal Processing and Data Rates; Estimating
Radiometric Performance; Estimating Size, Weight, and
Power; Evaluate Candidate Payloads; Observation
Payload Design Process; Assess life-cycle Cost and
Operability of the Payload and Mission
9.6 Examples
The FireSat Payload; MODIS-A Real FireSat Payload

As illustrated in Fig. 1-3 in Chap. I, the payload is the combination of hardware
and software on the spacecraft that interacts with the subject (the portion of the outside
world that the spacecraft is looking at or interacting with) to accomplish the mission
objectives. Payloads are typically unique to each mission and are the fundamental
reason that the spacecraft is flown. The purpose of the rest of the spacecraft is to keep
the payload healthy, happy, and pointed in the right direction. From a mission perspective it is worth keeping in mind that fulfilling these demands is what largely drives the
mission size, cost, and risk. Consequently, a critical part of mission analysis and
design is to understand what drives a particular set of space payloads so that these
elements can become part of the overall system trade process designed to meet mission
objectives at minimum cost and risk.
This chapter summarizes the overall process of payload design and sizing, with an
emphasis on the background and process for designing observation payloads such as
FtreSat. (Communications payloads are discussed in Chap. 13.) We begin with the
flow of mission requirements (from Chap. I) to payload requirements and the mission
operations concept (from Chap. 2) to a payload operations concept which defines how

241

T
242

Space Payload Design and Sizing

the specific set of space instruments (and possibly ground equipment or processing)
will be used to meet the end goals. We then summarize key characteristics of electromagnetic radiation, particularly those which define the performance and limitations of
space instruments. Finally, we provide additional details on the design of observation
payloads and develop a preliminary payload design for FrreSat,. which we compare
with the MODIS instrument, a real FrreSat payload for the Terra spacecraft in NASA
Earth Observing System.
Several authors have discussed space observation payload design in detail, such as
Chen [1985], Elachi [1987], and Hovanessian [1988]. More recently Cruise, et aI.
[1998] provides a discussion of a full range of payload design issues including optics,
electronics, thermal, structures and mechanisms, and program management In
addition, a number of authors provide extended discussions of specific types of observations missions. Schnapf [1985], Buiten and CIevers [1993], and Kramer [1996]
provide surveys of Earth observing missions and sensors. Huffman [1992] discusses
UV sensing of the atmosphere. Meneghini and Kozu [1990] and Kidder and Vonder
Haar [1995] discuss meteorology from space. Kondo [1990] and Davies [1997]
discuss astronomical observatories in space. Finally, Chap. 13 provides numerous
references on space communications payloads and systems.
Spacecraft missions have been flown to serve many purposes, and while virtually
every mission has unique elements and fulfills some special requirement, it is nonetheless possible to classify most space missions and payloads into the following broad
categories: communications, remote sensing, navigation, weapons, in situ science, and
other. Table 9-1 provides a sample of missions that fall within these categories along
with a primary payload and spacecraft that fits that particular mission. Many other
types of space missions have been proposed or demonstrated. We include these in
Table 9-1. We will introduce each of these spacecraft mission types, then focus on
first-order system engineering analysis of remote sensing payloads.
Communications. The purpose of the majority of spacecraft is to simply transfer
information. Communications missions range from wideband full-duplex telecommunications connectivity to one-way broadcast of television signals or navigation
messages. Communications has traditionally been dominated by large geosynchronous spacecraft, but constellations of smaller spacecraft in lower orbits are emerging
with alternative architectures for global coverage. New technologies are developing
rapidly, including research into using lasers for spacecraft communication. A detailed
discussion of communications payloads and subsystems is included in Sec. 11.2,
Chap. 13, and Morgan and Gordon [1989].
Remote Sensing. Spacecraft remote sensing represents a diverse range of missions
and applications. Any observation that a spacecraft makes without directly contacting
the object in question is considered remote sensing. Imaging the Earth's surface,
sounding the Earth's atmosphere, providing early warning of a ballistic missile launch,
or observing the characteristic chemical spectra of distant galaxies are all remote sensing missions. Fundamentally we focus on measurements in the electromagnetic spectrum to determine the nature, state, or features of some physical object or phenomenon.
Depending on the particular mission, we can evaluate different aspects of electromagnetic radiation to exploit different characteristics of the target with respect to
spatial, spectral, and intensity information content We also evaluate this information
in a temporal context that supports comparisons and cause-and-effect relationships.
The types of information and sensors used to provide this information are illustrated
in Fig. 9-1.

243
TABLE 9-1.

TYPes of Spacecraft MIssIons and Payloads.
Payload

Spacecraft MIssion

Example

COmmunications
FuD-duplex broadband
Message broadcast
Personal comm

Transceiver
Transmitter
Transceiver

MiIstar, Intelsat
DlreclV. GPS
Iridium

Remote Sensing
Imaging
Intensity measurement
Topogrephlc mapping

Imagers and cameras
Radiometers
Altimeters

landSat, Space Telescope
SBIRS early warning.
Chandra X·Ray Observatory.
TOPEXIPoseldon

Transceiver
Clock and transmitter

toRS
GPS.GLONASS

Weapons
Kinetic energy
Directed energy

Warhead
High-energy weapon

BriDlant Pebbles concept
Space-Based Laser concept

In SItu ScIence
Crewed
Robotic

Physical and rIfe scIences
Sample coDection/retum

Space Shuttle. Mlr
Mars Sojourner. LDEF

Physical plant and raw materials

Space Shuttle

Solar collector. convener. and
transmitter
Lunar soil collector and processor
Orbital hotel
Remains container

SPS

Navigation

Ranging
Navslgna/

Other

Microgravlty
Manufacturing
Space power
Resource utilization
Tourism
Space burial

Lunar Base
Various
PegesusXL

We make an additional distinction depending on the source of the electromagnetic
radiation being sensed. H the instrument measures direct or reflected solar radiation in
the environment, then we call it a passive sensor. Active sensors, on the other hand,
emit radiation that generates a reflected return which the instrument measures. The
principal active remote sensing ~ts are radar and li~..
..
Although our focus is on remote sensmg of~ many SClentific.nnssI~ ?bserve
electromagnetic phenomena elsewhere in the umverse. The phYSIcal pnnClples of
remote sensing and the categories of sensors are the same, regardless of whether the
payload is looking at deep space or the planet it is circling.
Navigation. GPS, GLONASS, and other international navigation systems }lave
demonstrated a wealth of applications for military, civilian, academic. and recreational
users. As discussed in Sec. 11.7.2, GPS provides information for real-time position,
velocity, and time determination. It is available worldwide on a broad range of platforms, inchiding cars, ships, commercial. and military aircraft, and spacecraft. The
heart of GPS is a spread-spectrum broadcast communication message that can be
exploited using relatively low-cost receivers.. .
... .
Weapons. While remote sensing, commumcation, and naVIgation a~lications are
quite mature and dominate the use of space, space-based weapons remam conceptuaI,
occupying a small niche in the reaIm of space mission design. In particular, concepts

244

T
I

Space Payload Design and Sizing

245

9.1 Payload Design and Sizing Process

Spatial
Information

Spectra-Radiometers
Intensity
Information

Fig. 9-1.

Payload Design and Sizing Process

Electromagnetic Information Content and Sensor Types. Sensor types inside the
triangle can observe the features shown outside the triangle. For example, each pixel
collected by an imaging radiometer reflects both spatial and intensity information.
ActiVe instruments (such as radar) are printed in bold italic text. (Modified from Elachi
[1987].)

for weapons in space became a topic of intense study and debate as part of the Strategic
Defense Initiative and space-based strategic missile defense. Development of certain
operational space weapons has been prohibited under the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty
of 1972. Although some experts view widespread weaponization of space as
inevitable, it has not become a stated objective ofU.S. national policy [DeBlois, 1997].
Of course, space has been used to support military objectives since the dawn of artificial spacecraft [Hall, 1995; McDougall, 1985], but the vast majority of military space
applications fall into the categories of remote sensing and communications.
In Situ Science. Sample collection and evaluation serves an important role in
planetary and space science. Perhaps the most elaborate instance of sample collection
took place in the Apollo missions when approximately 300 kg of samples from the
Moon were returned to Earth for analysis. Other examples of sample collection and
analysis include planetary landers (such as Viking and Mars Sojourner) and collection
of solar wind particles.
Other. Exploitation of physical resources in space-either from the Moon or
asteroids-bas sparked innovative and imaginative concepts for augmenting Earth's
limited resources or enabling human exploration of the solar system. In the nearer
term, however, space-based materials processing and manufacturing are more likely
to mature and exploit the characteristics of the microgravity environment (Sec. 8.1.6).
Glaser et al. [19931 has done extensive studies of satellite solar power, i.e., generating
solar power in space for use on Earth. Many authors have created designs for lunar
colonies and space tourism facilities, but all require a dramatic reduction in launch
cost. (See, for example, the CSTS Alliance's Commercial Space Transportation Study
[1994].)

Payload definition and sizing determines many of the capabilities aDd limitations
of the mission. The payload determines what the mission can achieve, while the size
of the payload, along with any special structural, thermal, control, communications, or
pointing restrictions, will influence the design of the remainder of the spacecraft
support systems.
We begin with the assumption that mission objectives are defined and the critical
mission requirements are understood. This section concentrates on a top-down methodology for bounding the trade space of possible payloads and making an informed
selection among them. This process is a useful guide for moving from a blank slate to
a preliminary set of payloads. Iterating on the process produces a more detailed
defmition and more useful set of payloads that can meet the mission objectives at
minimum cost and risk.
As shown in Table 9-2, the process begins with an understanding of mission
requirements described in Chaps. 3 and 4. The mission requirements have a major
effect on all aspects of space vehicle design, but it is frequently necessary to treat the
components and subsystems separately for preliminary design and sizing. We begin
with the payload because it is the critical mission element bounding spacecraft performance. Chapters 10 and 11 treat the remainder of the spacecraft systems and trade-offs
involved in the overall spacecraft design.
Once the mission requirements are understood, we must determine the level of
detail required to satisfy different aspects of the mission. For FireSat, varying levels of
detail are required if the task is to identify the existence of a fire, assess the damage
caused by frres, or characterize the combustibles in a fire. Additionally, the temporal
(timeliness) demands placed on the mission could be vastly different depending on
whether the data is to support long-term scientific analysis or real-time ground activity.
We summarize the basic steps in this process below and discuss them in more detail
in the remainder of this chapter for remote sensing payloads and in Chap. 13 for communications payloads.
1. Select Payload Objectives. These objectives will, of course, be strongly related
to the mission objectives defined in Chap. 1 and will also depend on the overall mission concept, requirements, and constraints from Chaps. 2, 3, and 4. However, unlike
the mission objectives which are a broad statement of what the mission must do to be
useful, the payload objectives are more specific statements of what the payload must
do (i.e., what is its output or fundamental function). For FrreSat, this is specific performance objectives in terms of identifying fires. For the space manufacturing example
in the table, called WaferSat, the payload objective is a definition of the end product
to be manufactured.
2. Conduct Subject Trades. The subject is what the payload interacts with or looks
at As discussed in detail in Sec. 9.2, a key part of the subject trade is determining what
the subject is or should be. For a mobile communications system, it is the user's handheld receiver. Here the subject trade is to determine how much capability to put in the
user unit and how much to put on the satellite. For FrreSat, we may get very different
results if we define the subject as the IR radiation produced by the fire or as the smoke
or visible flickering which the fire produces. In addition to defining the subject, we
need to determine the performance thresholds to which the system must operate. For
FrreSat, what temperature differences must we detect? For WaferSat, how pure must
the resulting material be? For mobile communications, how much rain attenuation

Space Payload Design and Sizing

9.1

TABLE 9-2. Process for Defining Space Payloads. See text for discussion. See Chap. 13 for
a discussion of communications payloadS.
FIreSat (Remote

Process Step
1. IJs8 mission

Product
Payload

objectives, concept, performance

requfremsnts, arid objectives
consbaInts to select
payload objectJves

2. Conduct subject
trades

SUbject deIInIIlon
and performance
threSholds

3. Develop the
End-~
pay/DaiI ope1!llfons concept for aD

mIssIOn phases
and operating
modes
RequIred payload
4.~
payload
capabBity
to meet mission
concept

=

SensIng) Example
Identify smoldering and
IIamIng fires

Space Manufacturing

Example

Manufacture u1b'a-pure
sIIlcon wafelS

DIsIinguIsh smoldering Less than 1 ppb
fires that are 3 K wanner Impuritfes over 50 em
square wafelS
than the back~
from flaming
that
are 10K wanner than
the background

DeIermlne how end
Define user method to
uselS wID receive and
specify product needs,
act on fire detection data recover and use
maIeriaIs

Where

Discussed
Chapa1,2

Sec. 9.2

Sees.

2.1,9.4,
Chap. 14

12-blt quantlzal!on 01
radiometric intensity In
the 3-5 JI.lII wavelength

Throughput 015,000
waferS/day on orbit

Sec. 9.4.3

SpecIIIcatIons for
SenseIS #1 and #2

Specifications for
FactorIes #1 and #2

Sec. 9.&

Sensor #1 meets the
sensitivity requirement
but requires a data rate
0110Mbps.
Sensor #2 can 9IlIY
identify flaming fires that
are 10 K warmer than
the background but
:/tres a data rate of
1.5Mbps

Factory #1 produces
Sec. 9.5.3
&,000 WafelSlday,
walghs 80 kg, and
uses2kW
Factory #2 produces
4,000 WafelSlday (soma
of which wID have >1 ppb
impurities), walghs
100 kg, and uses 500 W

Spacecraft and ground
archltectura based on
1.5 Mbps data rate.
Adjust mission
requirement to Identify
IIamIng fires only
(not smoldering}

Select #1 with 1,000
Sees.
wafersl~ margin to ba 9.5.4, 9.&.1
sold to
uce cost

of 1nterest1

5. Iderr/ffy candidate
payloads

InIIfaI fist 01

potent/aI payloads

6. EsIIma1s candidate Assessment 01
payload capab/lll/es each candIdeIe
and chataClerislfcs payload

[mission output,

perforrnanciI, size,

mass, and power1

7. Evaluate candidate PreUmlnary .
payloads and select payload definition
a baseline

8. Assess Iife-cyr:Is
cost
of the
mission

m;::c:::::r

9.

'::::frateand

neg

payloacJ..derived
requirements

10. Document and

ItetaIe

RevIsed payload
performance

~bycost

~wIth
emission

perfOmJanca and cost

or an:hItecIuriI
UmItatIons
Derived
Data handling
requirements for
subsystem requirement
reI8Ied subsystems to accommodate
~Ioad data rate
01 .5Mbps
BaseUne payload
design

BaseUne FIreSat

payload

~:

Sec. 9.5.8,

ACS system to provide
140 continuous min 01
jitter less than :t 1 nm

Sec. 9.5.4

an Arlana secontlary
payload on ASAP rii1g

Chap. 20

BaseUne WaferSat
payload

must we be able to accommodate? These will be iterative trades as we begin to define
the payload instruments and can intelligently evaluate cost Vs. performance.
3. Develop the Payload Operations Concept. Ultimately, the data or product
produced by the payload must get to the user in an appropriate form or format. How
will the end user of FrreSat data receive and act on the satellite data? How will the

T

9.l

Payload Design and Sizing Process

247

manufacturer recover the WaferSat materials and define what is to be done on the next
flight? Payload operations will have a major impact on the cost of both the spacecraft
and mission operations. As discussed in Chap. 15, payload operations may be done by
the same facility and personnel that handle the spacecraft or, similar to the Space
Telescope, may be an entirely different operations activity.
4. Determine the Required Payload Capability. What is the throughput and
performance required of the payload equipment to meet the performance thresholds
defined in Step 2? For FrreSat what is the specification on the equipment needed to
meet the temperature, resolution, or geolocation requirements? For WaferSat, how
many wafers of what size will it produce? For mobile communications, now many
phone calls or television channels must it handle simultaneously?
5. Identify Canditkde Payloads. Here we identify the possible payloads and their
specifications. For simple missions there will be a single payload instrument. For most
missions, there will be multiple instruments or units which frequently must work
iogether to meet mission requirements. Different complements of equipment may
break the tasks down in different ways and may even work with different aspects of
the subject. Thus, a system designed to identify the source of solar storms may have
an imager and a spectrometer or a magnetometer and an instrument to map small
temperature fluctuations on the photosphere or in the solar wind.
6. Estimqte CandUloJe Payload ChoracteristU:s. Here we need to determine the
performance characteristics, the cost, and the impact on the spacecraft bus and ground
system so that we can understand the cost vs. performance for each of the viable
candidate systems. Payloads will differ in their performance and cost, but also in
weight, power, pointing, data rate, thermal, structural support, orbit, commanding, and
processing requirements. We must know all of these impacts to conduct meaningful
ttades.
7. Evaluate CandUloJes and Select a Baseline. Here we examine the alternatives

and make a preliminary selection of the payload combination that will best meet our
cost and performance objectives. In selecting a baseline, we must decide which
elements of performance are worth how much money. The payload baseline is strongly
related to the mission baseline and can not be defined in isolation of the rest of the parts
of the mission and what it will be able do for the end user.
8. Assess life-cyele Cost and Operability. Ultimately, we want to determine
mission utility as a function of cost. This process was described in detail in Chap. 3.
Typically it will not be a simple cost vs. level of performance characterization. Rather
it is a complex trade that requires substantial interaction with potential users and with
whatever organization is funding the activity. It may become necessary at this point to
relax or prioritize some of the mission requirements in order to meet cost and schedule
objectives. For FrreSat we may decide that only one type of fire or one geographic
region will be addressed. For WaferSat we may reduce the purity, the size of the
wafers, or the throughput.
9. Define Payloa4-derived Requirements. In this step we provide a detailed
definition of the impact of the selected payloads on the requirements for the rest of the
system (i.e.. the spacecraft bus, the ground segment, and mission operations). FrreSat
will have power, pointing, geolocation, and data rate requirements. WaferSat may care
very little about pointing and geolocation, but will have requirements .on the spacecraft
cleanliness levels and jitter control. These, in turn, may levy secondary requirements
such as storage for onboard commands or thermal stability for pointing and jitter
control.

248

Space Payload Design and Sizing

9.1

10. Document and Iterate. Although this point is emphasized throughout the
book, we stress again the need to document what we have decided and why. The
"why" is critical to allowing the system trades to proceed at a future time. We can
make preliminary decisions for a wide variety of reasons, but we must understand
these reasons in order to intelligently continue to do payload and system trades. Like
all of the space mission analysis and design process, payload definition is iterative. We
will come back to the process many times as we learn more about the consequences of
preliminary choices.
Figure 9-2 illustrates the conceptual process of payload sizing. At the bottom end
of the curve, we need to spend a minimum amount of money to achieve any performance at all. Near minimum performance, a sma1l amount of additional expense will
substantially increase performance. At the top end of the curve, we can spend a lot of
money for very smaIl improvement. The overall payload performance per unit cost
follows a straight line through the origin and whatever point on the performance vs.
cost curve we are working at Therefore, the maximum perfonnance per unit cost
occurs where a straight line through the origin is tangent to the curve.

Mission Requirements and Subject Trades

249

9.2 Mission Requirements and Subject Trades
Defining requirements and constraints for,space missions occurs as descn'bed in
Chaps. 1 and 2. The overall mission requirements dictate the technical performance of
the payload, while the mission concepts and constraints detemJine the operational
implementation for the mission. Frequently the technical specification and operations
concept for payloads are interrelated. For example, increasing temporal resolution
(revisit) may reduce the requirement for spatial resolution in an optical sensor system.
We must ensure that the mission requirements capture the fundamental needs of the
users without constraining the designer's ability to satisfy these requirements through
alternate technical means.
For FrreSat we begin with the overall mission requirement to detect, identify, and
locate forest fires, then consider the level ~f detail needed to satisfy the mission. Often
it is useful to articulate the questions that need to be answered or the decisions that
need to be made based on sensor data. Possible questions for the FrreSat mission planners include:
• Can a new fire be detected within 2 hours? Twenty minutes?
• What is the geographic extent of the fire?
• Can smoldering fires be distinguished from flaming fires?

Perfonnance
Solutions

• What are the primary combustibles (can fires burning organic material be
distinguished from petroleum and chemical fires)?

~

• What direction is the fire spreading and how quickly?

BestPerfonnance
per Unit Cost

• How much smoke and ash is the fire generating?
• Where is the fire burning hottest?
• At which locations would additional firefighting efforts to contain and
suppress the fire be most effective?

""-.. Lowest Cost Solutions

Cost
Fig. 9-2. Performance vs. Cost. The tangent point is the highest perfonnance per unit cost

There are good reasons for operating at any region along the curve in Fig. 9-2. To
design a good payload, we must decide where along the curve our particular mission
should be. At the high end w~ obtain the best available performance. This would be
appropriate for some military or science missions, such as the Space Telescope or
Chandra X-Ray Observatory. UghtSats are at the bottom end of the curve. They
perform modestly at very low cost. They may also be appropriate for multi-satellite,
distributed systems. Large commercial activities, such as communications satellites,
need the best perfonnance per unit cost
The key to deciding how to size our payload is to look carefully at the mission
objectives, particularly the tacit rules which often imply how well we want to do. Do
we need the best performance regardless of cost? Can the mission proceed only on a
minimum budget? Is this a long-tenn, continuing, and potentially competitive activity
in which performance per unit cost is critical? The answers to these questions will let
us correctly size the payload and the mission to meet our mission objectives.

• What other sources of information exist from air-, ground-, or space-based
sources?
• If available, how might other sources of information be used?

Specific mission objectives and priorities addressed by these questions will determine the specific observables linking payload performance with mission performance.
To choose a remote sensing payload, the key steps to a disciplined and repeatable
design begin with determining the elements of information that we need to address the
problem. We must specify the physically observable quantities that contribute to .
elements of information about the problem in sufficient detail to ensure they can be
detected by a spacecraft payload with sufficient resolution to provide meaningful
insight into the subject
Establishing performance thresholds provides a framework for trading off perfonnance across a number of different design features. For all missions, payload
performance evaluation categories include physical performance constraints and operational constraints. Examples of physical perfonnance constraints include limits on
spatial, spectral, radiometric, and temporal resolution. Operational constraints include
sensor duty cycle limits, tasking and scheduling limits on sensor time, and resource
contention (inability of the sensor to view two targets of interest simultaneously).

2SO

Space Payload Design and Sizing

Mission Requirements and Subject Trades

Within each of the categories of sensor constraints, we should establish an absolute
minimum threshold such that any performance that does not meet this capability is
unacceptable. The minimum threshold values generally will not satisfy mission objectives, but establishing the minimum level of usefulness for the mission allows
flexibility for trade-offs. At the other extreme, we should specify the desired performance to establish the performance that will fully satisfy the requirement We can also
define an intermediate value-an acceptable level of performance-tQ articulate a
desired level of performance that will meet the bulk of mission objectives. Table 9-3
illustrates a sample of performance thresholds for the FJreSat mission payload across
the functional areas of resolution, quantity, timeliness, periodicity, geolocation
accuracy, and completeness. These distinctions can be critical in determining the viability of a mission concept In commercial remote sensing, for example, the range of
performance requirements from minimum to desired is typically determined through
extensive market analysis and business development case studies. These studies
frequently identify a minimum resolution (or other performance parameter) below
which a remote sensing spacecraft concept will not be profitable.
TABLE 9-3. Sample Threshold Performance RequIrements for the F1reSat Payload.
Desired performance represents the maximum reasonable level of performance
across aU design features.
MInImum
Acceptable .
SubJecl
Detect presence or
Identify, iocate, and track
Characteristics absence ofJerge fires progress of fires

Desired
Determine thermal
conditions within fires and
products of combustion

Quantity

Measure existence
of 1 fire

Simultaneousiy measure
and track 7 fires

Simultaneously measure
and track 20 fires

TImeliness

Report detection of
fire within 6 hours

Report detection of fire
within 2 hours

Report detection of fire
within 20 min

Update status of
fire every 2 hours

Update status of fire
every 90 min

Update status of fire
every 45 min

Revisit
Interval

Geo/ocetJon
Determine location of
Accuracy
fire within :t100 km
Completeness Map fires in
continental U.S.

Determine location and
Determine location and
extent of fire within :t1 km extent of fire within :t100 m
Map fires in North America Map fires globaUy
and one other selectable
region (e.g., Persian Gulf)

We need to parameterize the mission. such as identifying and locating forest fires,
in such a way that we can evaluate, size, and design candidate sensors. This
parameterization involves a process of requirements analysis that focuses on matching
the tasks involved in the mission with categories of discipline capabilities. If we match
mission requirements with existing or probable capabilities the result is a set of potential information requirements. We then try to identify the characteristics of the subject
(signatures) that correspond to the information requirements through a set of rules. For
the FireSat example, these rules consist of the spectral wavelengths and thresholds
needed to detect fires. The rules yield a set of mission observables, such as specific
wavelength bands and spectral sensitivities that we need in our sensor. These
observables provide the basis for the payload characteristics that comprise the baseline
design to satisfy the mission. In the case of FJreSat, the basic mission categories that
might satisfy this mission and the corresponding information type are shown in
Table 94.

251

TABLE 11-4. Slmplmed Subject Trades for F1reSat Mission. The information type aUows for
subject trades to be made among the different signatures that can be exploited to
satisfy FireSat mission requirements.
Sensor Type

InformaUon Type

ErectTo-optJcallmager

Visible retum from nght or smoke cloud produced by the fire

SpeCtrometer
Radiometer

Spectral signatures from products of combustion
Thermal intensity

A unique signature exhibited by fires is the flickering light in a fire. This flicker has
a characteristic frequency of about 12 Hz and can be exploited by processing the data
stream from an electro-optical sensor to search for this frequency [Miller and
Friedman, 1996]. Light flickering at this frequency produces an irritating effect on the
human vision system, possibly as a survival adaptation for the species against the
threat of wildfires.
There are many choices and types of sensors, more than one of which might be a
candidate to perform a given mission. In the case ofFJreSat, it may be possible to satisfy basic mission requirements by observing a number of different phenomenologies:
visible signatures associated with flame and smoke, thermal infrared signatures from
the fire, spectral analysis of the products of combustion, or an algorithm combining all
of these. The selection of a spacecraft payload represents the fundamental leap in
determining how to satisfy mission requirements with a space sensor. In the previous
section we introduced a top-down framework for considering the general problem of
spacecraft design. Here we tum our attention to the payload; in particular, a methodology for determining the type of payload to employ and the physical quantities to

measure.
Figure 9-3 illustrates the framework for the heart of the payload design process. The

process begins with a task or mission requirement and ends with a spacecraft payload
design. We have divided this process into intermediate steps to focus the effort along
the way to a final design. In this section we focus on describing the process illustrated
in Fig. 9-3; Sec. 9.4 provides some of the specific techniques that are employed in this
process for visible and IR systems.
For the FrreSat mission design. we need to identify specific signatures that would
allow candidate sensors to provide viable solutions to the mission requirement We
observe physical phenomena through signatures, and we must choose which signature
will provide the desired information. The specific signatures that a payload senses
must be evaluated in light of the particular focus of the mission. For example, a
spectrometer that is sensitive enough to detect all fires, but which cannot be used to
differentiate campfires from forest fIres could generate a large false alarm rate and
render it operationally useless. DefIning the key signatures and observables that
support the information content needed to satisfy the mission determine the performance limits for the payload design.

9.2.1 Subject Trades
The objective of a space mission is typically to detect, communicate, or interact
The subject, as an element of the space mission, is the specific thing that the spacecraft
will detect, communicate, or interact with. For OPS, the subject is the .OPS receiver,
For FJreSat, we would assume that the subject is the heat generated by the forest fire.
But other subjects are possible: light, smoke, or changes in atmospheric composition.

Space Payload Design and Sizing

252

9.2

MIssion Requirements and Subject Trades

253

TABLE 9-5. Subject Trade Process. Note that the subject trades lead directly to the payload
trade process as discussed In Sec. 9.2

Step
1. Determine fundamental mission
objectives

"",_,:i!,I,

fl,'""

I,
;:;g:
,~.
;giL

I
Ag. 9-3. Process for Unklng MIssIon RequIrements to Payload DesIgn. The process
moves from mission requirements to a payload design In three steps: requirements
analysis, subject trades, and payload analysis.

What we choose as the subject will dramatically affect performance, cost, and the
mission concept. Thus, we must do this tIade carefully and review it from time to time
to ensure it is consistent with mission objectives and our goal of minimizing cost and
risk.
Table 9-5 summarizes the subject-trade process. We begin by looking at the basic
mission objectives and then ask what subjects coUld meet these objectives. To do this,
we should look at what we are trying to achieve, the properties of space we intend to
exploit, and the characteristics of what we are looking at or interacting with. Table 9-6
shows examples of subject tIades for four representative missions. As the missions
change, the nature of the subject trades will also change. For FrreSat, we are looking
for a well-defined subject (the forest fire), and we want to do this at minimum cost and
risk. With the Space Telescope, we must ask. "What am I looking for? What am I trying to detect and how can I detect it?" For any of the science missions, we would ask,
'18 the subject some distant and unknown object, or is it part of the electromagnetic
spectrum I am trying to explore?"
For a space system intended to detect airplanes, the main subject trades would
concern mission goals. Are the targets cooperative or noncooperative? Do we need to
track over the poles? Should we track in high-density areas around airports or over the
.open oceans? The answers to these questions will determine the nature of the subject
trades.

Perhaps the easiest subject tIades are-those in which the system will be interacting
with a ground element that is a part of the system, such as direct broadcast television
or a truck communication system. In this case, the subject trade becomes simply an
issue of how much capacity should go on the spacecraft vs. how much should go in the
unit on the ground.

FJreSat Example
Detect and monitor forest fires

Where
DIscussed

Sec. 1.3

2. Determine what possible subjects could Heat, fire, smoke,
be used to meet these objectives (i.e., atmospheric composition
what could the system detect or interact
with to meet the objectives)

Sec. 9.2

3. Determine broad class of ways that the Heat->IR
spacecraft can detect or Interact with
flame, smoke -> visual
the possible subjects
atmospheric composition -> lldar
4. Determine H subject is passive or
Initially assume passive fire
controDable
detection
Sa. For controllable subjects, do trade of
NlA
puWng functionality at the subject, In the
space system, or In the ground system

Sec. 9.2

5b. For passive subjects, determine general Forest fire temperature range
characteristics that can be detected
and total heat output

Sec. 9.2

6. Determine whether multiple subjects
and payloads should be used

Not initially

Sec. 9.2

7. Define and document Initial subject
selection

IR detection of heat

NlA

8. Review selection frequently for
alternative methods and possible
use of ancillary subjects

See Sec. 22.3,

NlA

Sec. 9.2
Sscs.2.1,
3.2.3

a1temative low cost for AreSat

The next step for subject trades is to determine whether the subject is controllable
or passive. The system designer knows and can control characteristics of controllable
or active subjects. This includes ground stations, antennas, receivers, and transmitters
such as those used for ground communications, direct broadcast television, or data
relay systems. Because we can control the subject, we can put more or less capability
within it. Thus we might choose to have a simple receiver on the ground with a bighpower, accurately pointed. narrow-beam transmitter on the spacecraft. Or we could
place a sophisticated, sensitive receiver on the ground with a smaIl, lower-cost system
in space. Usually. the solution will depend on the number of ground stations we wish
to interact with. If there are many ground stations, as in direct-broadcast television, we
will put as much capability as possible into the satellite to drive down the cost and
complexity of the ground stations. On the other hand, if there are only a few ground
stations, we can save money by giving these stations substantial processing and pointing capability and using a simpler, lighter-weight, and lower-cost satellite.
Passive subjects are those in which the characteristics may be known but cannot be
altered. This includes phenomena such as weather, quasars, or forest fires. Even
though we cannot control the object under examination, we can choose the subject
from various characteristics. We could detect forest fires by observing either the fire
itself or the smoke in the visible or infrared spectrum. We could detect atmospheric
composition changes or, in principle, reductions in vegetation. Thus, even for passive
subjects, the subject is part of the system tIades.

r

254

Space Pa~load Design and Sizing

TABLE 9-6. Representative Subject Trades. Subject trades for the Space Telescope are
particularly interesting In that a significant goal of the system is to discover previously unknown phenomena or objects.
AIrplane

Mission

FJreSat

Property of
space used

Global
perspective

Detection

Truck
Communlcetlons
System

Space Telescope

Global perspective

Global perspective Above the
atmosphere

General
Forest fires
objectofstudy
or interacl/on

Airplanes

Portable
Distant galaxies +
telecommunication unknown
centers
phenomena

Alternative
mission
subjects

Are
(visible or IA)

Skin (radar, visible)
Plume (IA)

Current radio

Quasars

CurrentCB

Smoke
(visible or IA)

Galaxies

Radio emissions
(AF)

COz

Standard TV
Planets
New
Visible spectrum
telecommunication
Unknown objects
center

Decreased
vegetation

Cellular relay

Key subject
trades

None-IA
Aadar vs. IA vs.
detection
ective AF
probably best
choice

Complexity of truck
element vs. complexity of space &
ground station

Comments

See low-cost
alternative In
Chap. 22

Increased

Background

9.3

Is the subject known
or unknown? is It
objects or spectral
regions?

Need to examine
goals; cooperative
vs. noncooperative
targets; high density
vs. ocean tracking

We do not always know whether a given mission has passive or active subjects; in
some cases, we can choose either type. For example, we could detect airplanes
passively with an IR sensor or radar, or actively by listening for or interrogating a
transponder on the airplane. Chapter 22 summarizes an alternative for sensing forest
fires by using equipment on the ground and then relaying it to space-a technique
possible for various mission types. Satellites that monitor the weather or environment
could do complex observations or simply collect and relay data from sensors on the
ground.
The next step is to determine whether we need multiple subjects (and. probably,
multiple payloads) to meet our mission objectives. Using multiple subjects at the same
time has several advantages. This approach can provide much more information than
is available from a single subject and can eliminate ambiguities which occur when
observing only one aspect. On the other hand, multiple subjects typically require multiple payloads, which dramatically drive up the space mission's cost and complexity.
Thus, a principal trade is between a low-cost mission with a single subject and single
payload vs. a more expensive mission that achieves higher performance by using
several payloads to sense several different subjects related to the same objective.
For FrreSat. we tentatively select the heat of the forest fire as the subject of the
mission. keeping in mind that this may change as the design evolves. Of course, we
should make these trades as rapidly as possible because they strongly affect how the
mission is done.

255

Fmally, as always, we should document the subject selection and review it
frequently during the program's early stages. looking for other possible methods and
subjects. Looking for alternative subjects is perhaps the single most important way to
drive down the cost of space missions. We need to continually ask ourselves. ''What
are we trying to achieve, including the tacit rules of the program, and how can we
achieve itT'

9.3 Background'
9.3.1 The Electromagnetic Spectrum

As Fig. 9-4 illustrates, the electromagnetic spectrum is a broad class of radiation. It
includes gamma rays and X-rays, with extremely short wavelengths measured in
angstroms (A=10-10 m), as w~ll as visible and infrared (JR) ~avelen~ of 10-7 ~o
10..3 m and the microwave region from 0.1 to 30 cm. Finally, It ranges mto the radio
spectrum, with wavelengths as long as kilometers. As the figure shows, satellite
systems operate over the entire spectral range. N~al wavelengths for .~msats,
radars. and microwave radiometers range from approXImately 1meter to 1 millimeter,
whereas visual and IR systems operate from around 0.35 to 100 microns (1 micron
10-6 m =1 J.I.1D).
.

=

Gamma-1

GRANAT
ALEXIS

CQS.II

NImbus
SeaSaI

DXB

=.

QAO..

1lEA<).2 ROSA~ (VISIBlE)
CHANDRA
I

SA&2

GRO

GAMMA I
RAYS

I ULTRA- I I

I X-RAYS

I

I

I

o.lA

IA

loA

I VIOlET : :

I

looA

I

Muses-II

RADIO (RF)
I/EJiF

(IR)

I

I

v_

RAE

,

INFRARED

I

I

SHF

UHF

I

I

VHF
I

HF
I

MF
I

LF

VLF\

I

I

I

10m 100m lion 1010n 10010n WAVELENGTH

0.1':" Ipm 10pm i'ilopm O.lcm I em 100m 1m

3.,0'" 3"'018 3",d73xIJ63",Ii" 3",t143.,d"3"'d" 3,'1i! 3"'0'· 3.,11' 3"'0" 3",07 3.,0" 3.,0" 3"'0' 3"'0'

/
/ /

/'

/

FJg. 9-4.

ST

~

I
I
I VISIBLE I
I YBIG Vlo, 'I
0.4

'" "

,/

o.s o.s

COBE

SORA

NEAR INFRARED

I I
1

15

2

= .....

'"

Ea1fh.......... ~ .....

IRAS

SIRTF

FREQUENCY,Hz

lRO

"

I~~I~INFRAREDI~

INFRARED ,
I I I I
,

4

6

(IlIERMAL IR)

I I II
8

10

'INFRARED
I I

15

20

I
30

WAVELENGTH, pm

The Electromagnetic Spectrum. The expanded view hlghnghts visible and Infrared .
wavelengths frequently exploited by sateUItes. Sample space missions across the
entire spectrum are listed above the band region.

For all electromagnetic radiation in a vacuuin, the relation between the wavelength.
A., and the frequency, v,* is

c =AV= 2.997 92458 x

1()8

mls

(9..1)

where c is the speed of light. Thus, in terms of frequency, the usable electromagnetic
spectrum ranges from radio waves measured in kilohertz (kHz) to gamma rays with
• Both v and! are commonly used to represent frequency. We use V throughout this chapter to
avoid confusion with foca11ength, which is also represented by f.

'q

Space Payload Design and Sizing

256

9.3

frequencies in the tens of exahertz (EHz). (1 kilohertz = 1,000 cyc1es!s =300-ktn
wavelength; 1 exahertz = 109 GHz = 1018 cyc1es!s = wavelength of 3 angstroms or
3 x to-lOin.)·
At any temperature above absolute zero (0 K), all matter continuously emits electromagnetic radiation. This is called thermal radiation or blackbody radiation. For a
perfect blackbody, the rate of total energy emission and the energy distribution by
wavelength or frequency is a function only of the temperature, T. The actual spectrum
of emitted radiation from a real object will depend on the surface characteristics for
small objects, such as a spacecraft, or on the atmosphere for large objects, such as the
Earth or Sun. Nonetheless, in practice the blackbody energy distribution is a good
starting point for analysis. The spectral energy distribution of a blackbody is given by
Planck's Law:
21thc

Ejl =

2

1

---;r- echlkTil -1

(9-2)

where Ejl is the energy per unit wavelength (also called the spectral irradiance and
typically measured in W om-2o lJ.Ilrl),A is the wavelength, h is Planck's constant
(6.6260755 x 10-34 Wos2), Tis the absolute temperature, c is the speed of light, and
kis Boltzmann's constant (1.380 658 x 10-23 Wos/K). Figure 9-5 shows typical energy
distribution curves for various blackbody temperatures. When Ejl is divided by the
solid angle (in steradians) leaving an extended source in a given direction, it becomes
Ljl the spectral radiance (typical units, W-m-2.J.I.lIlI"SJ'-I).
Frequency (Hz)

1018

I

10 20

W1en's Iaw,Am

.. I

,e
!
flc

1014

1010

106

j'

V

10-4

\

lr
1010

.!!

10-12

i

~~

I...
..:::
'C

i

StefanBoltzmann's
equation, E

10-16
10-20

10-10
10-12 (1

m

i
rIJ

10-24

A)

l r (lpm) 10-4 (1 em)

102

104

Wavelength (m)

F1go9-5. Planck's Blackbody Radiation Curves as a FuncUon of Wavelength and Frequency [Chen, 1985]. Planck's law defines the shape of the curve over all frequencies,
the Stefan-Boltzmann's law defines the area under the curve (the total energy emitted
over all wavelengths), and Wien's displacement law defines the wavelength of
maximum radiance.

• A list of all metric prefixes is at the front of Appendix F.

9.3

Background

2S7

From Planck's Law we can derive two other important relations. FJrSt, we obtain
the Stefan-Boltzmann's Law by integrating Eq. (9-2) over the complete spectrum,
yielding the total radiant emittance, Wb:
Wb

=O'T4

(9-3)

where 0' is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, 5.67051 x lO-8 W~m-2.K-4, and Wb is
typically in W1m2• Second, we derive Wien' s Displacement Law by differentiating
Eq. (9-2) and settiilg the result equal to zero. The straight-line result defines the locus
of peak spectral radiance vs. temperature, as shown on Fig. 9-5 and defined by
~ =2,898 IT
(9-4)
where ~ is in ~ when T is in K.
Remote-sensing instruments are aimed at a target on the Earth's surface or in space.
Radars measure the characteristics of reflected, self-generated signals. For other
sensors, an object's spectral radiance, or brightness, depends on itS equivalent blackbody temperature. This is the temperature of a perfect radiating body which has the
same total radiance. Visual systems, which use film or solid-state detectors to form the
images, can take advantage of the Sun's reflected energy, based on its blackbody
temperature of about 6,000 K. Of course, without sunlight, visual images are much less
distinct. On the other hand, systems using infrared and microwave radiometry measure
scenes against the Earth's intrinsic thermal radiation background (corresponding to
about 300 K). Thus, they can operate day or night, as well as through clouds and other
atmospheric disturbances. Note, though, how much weaker the signals are in the RF
bands compared to the IR ranges.
As Fig. 9-6 shows, the electromagnetic spectrum has many frequency bands for
which the Earth's atmosphere is nearly opaque. We must avoid these bands if we wish
to observe ground scenes. This phenomenon also allows us to sound the atmosphere
and measure such interesting data as the thickness and location of cloud layers, water
vapor contained in clouds, and other upper-atmospheric phenomena using the opaque
bands. Clouds, rain, and snow tend to produce noise and thus attenuate signals for both
communication and remote-sensing, even in the window bands.
When a sensor views an aiea in space, the radiation that reaches the sensor could
come from a number of sources. The energy reflected directly from the target is
usually the dominant feature of interest for optical remote sensing, but other emitted,
reflected and scattered energy can complicate the picture. The primary (direct) and
secondary (single scatter) sources of electromagnetic radiation are shown in Fig. 9-7.
The sources of radiation in Fig. 9-7 give rise to a number of different strategies for
distinguishing different phenomena within the atmosphere or on the surface. For a given
application, any of the sources of radiation will either be the subject being analyzed or
noise to be minimized. Radiative measurements include the full complexity of all the
effects on that radiation such as reflection, refraction, absorption, transmission, and
scattering by material substances in solid, liquid, and gaseous phases. Distinguishing
and identifying features using remote sensing techniques must take all of these variables into account As Miller and Friedman [1996] advise, "when modeling the real
world, allow for some slack to represent reality."
9.3.2 Basic. Telescope Optics

A brief review of physical optics and antenna theories will show that systems for
gathering or transmitting optical and RF signals are exactly the same in theory-only

Space Payload Design and Sizing

258

9.3

Background

9.3

259

Ultra

80
60
40
20

lc

iE
!

0.5

1/1

100

1.0

10.0

1.5 2.0 3.0
5.0
Wavelength ((.un)

15.0 20.0 30.0

Atmosphere

Far Infrared ..... Microwave

80

60
40

Earth Surface

20

O~~=cca~~~YwW--L~~~____~
300
500
1.0
5.0
10
I
~
Wavelength (em)
Wavelength ((.un)

60

30

I

I

10 6
I

I

3

I
Frequency (GHz)

I

Rg.9-6. Transmission Characteristics of the Earth's Atmosphere. Transparent regions are
referred to as windows in the atmosphere.

the physical hardware is different Thus, a mirror (in visual and IR systems) and the
reflector of a dish antenna (in microwave radiometry and radar) are equivalent This
section only summarizes remote-sensing instrument analysis. The Manual of Remote
Sensing [Colwell, 1983] provides an extensive discussion, including image analysis.
Seyrafi's [1985] treatment is also comprehensive, and ends with a design example of
a thermal imaging system for a spacecraft.
In this discussion, we treat reflective :;ystems (optical systems using mirrors) and
refractive :;ystems (optical lens systems) together and refer to them both as optical
:;ystems. Reflective and refractive systems have advantages and disadvantages, which
we will discuss later.
There are several ways to describe an optical system. Parallel rays of light falling
on a perfect lens will all converge at the focal point, whose distance from the lens is
called thefocallength,f. The foca1length largely determines the length of the optical
collection system and for a single lens, it is related to the lens surface's radius of
curvature. The foca1length of a spherical reflecting surface is one-half its radius. For
a parabolic reflector whose surface is defined by the equation z2 =4.fY, the quantity f
is the focal length; it equals the distance from the focus to the nearest point on the
reflecting surface.
In design practice, we normally determine the required foca1length based on field
of view and the size of the image plane. The plate scale, s, or length per field-of-view

FIg. 9-7.

Sources of RadlaUon. Radlatlon that reaches the sensor can corne from a number of
different sources. The dlagram lDustrates aU dlrect and single-scatter radiation that
reaches a space sensor. The sources of radiation are: (1) sunUght scattered by the
atmosphere Into the sensor; (2) sunfight reflected off the Earth and then scattered by
the atmosphere into the sensor; (3) sunfight reflected off the Earth's surface; (4) sunfight scattered by the atmosphere then reflected off the Earth's surface Into the sensor;
(5) ground emission; (6) ground emission scattered by the atmosphere into the sensor;
(7) atmospheric emission; (8) atmospheric emission reflected by the Earth's surface
into the sensor; and (9) atmospheriC emission scattered by the atmosphere into the
sensor. [Adapted from Kramer, 1996.)

angle is given by
s=f
=0.01745f

unit lengthlrad
unit lengthldeg

(9-5)

where s andfare in the same units. The image size is a function of s and the size of the
detector-ranging from a single element to a large array~mployed at the focal plane.
As Fig. 9-8 shows, the foca1length needed to record an object or scene of radius R is
given by

L = rd =magnification

(9-6)

h R
where h is the distance from the spacecraft to the object, rd is the radius of the detector
may in the image plane, and R is the radius of the object, with the image and object
measured perpendicular to the line of sight The magnification or scale rd IR is the
ratio of the image size to the object size. It is ordinarily a very small number for satellites. We express the scale on the image plane as ""I em equals x km on the ground."
We can also describe an optical element or system by its so-called infinity F-number or F-stop, often written as f !(read '"F-stop"), F, F No., or FtI.1t is defined asf !D.
where D is the aperture or diameter of the lens. Image brightness is proportional to
IIF-2, so an F-4lens gives an image four times brighter than an F-81ens.

=

Space Payload Design and Sizing

260

9.3

Background

9.3

The numerical aperture, NA, gives the same information in another way:

PIxel of Ground-resoJutJon Element In Image Plane

1
D
NAe-=2F# 2/

T----~

261

(9-7)

1
f
(9-8)
F#=-=2NA D
The largest numerical aperture for optics used in air is 1. Thus, the smallest F# is 05.
All optical systems suffer from aberrations, or imperfections in the image quality,
in addition to diffraction which limits the system resolution as discussed in Sec. 9.3.3.
The principal optical aberrations are listed in Table 9-7. Chromatic aberration, or
imperfections which are color or wavelength dependent, arises from various wavelengths being bent by different amounts when they pass through a lens. Consequently,
only systems with at least one refractive element suffer chromatic aberration because
reflective surfaces treat all wavelengths the same. (This is not absolutely true since
some surfaces will reflect visible light, for example, but not X-rays. However, when
reflection does occur it is independent of wavelength to frrst order.)

or

L_____ _

FIeld Stop for Aperture with Diameter

=D

I
I
I
I
I
I
I

/1
I

Ray from
Eageol

0= 2Ian-1(Td/ f) = Angular Diameter
of Reid of VIew

Target

ScaJe = MagnIfIcation = Tdl R = f I h
h

1

TABLE 9-7. Principal Aberrations In OpUcal Systems. See Table 9-8 for which of these are
mitigated in various optical systems.

=

Chromatic Aberration dispersion of the Dght due to the refractive index of a lens being a
function of the wavelength. Causes different colors to focus at different distances.

=

Spherical Aberration dispersion In which Dght from the periphery of a spherical lens or
mirror Is focused nearer the element than light from the center. Can be eliminated by making
the optical surface parabolic, rather than spherical.
Coma = dispersion of off-axis portions of the Image. (So named because In a telescope offaxis star Images look like tear drops or the coma of a comet pointing toward the center of the
Image.)

=

AstIgmatism aberration in which the distorted image is asymmetric such as when light in
a horizontal plane comes to a slightly different focus than light in a vertical plane. A common
problem in human vision.

rot= Solid Angle Defining
UpweDlng Rux
= AdcosO,/(ll'cosOt)2

- - -+
I

I
I
I

Distortion = when an otherwise sharp image Is distorted in shape, such as when straight
fines on the surface being viewed appear curved on the focal plane. A uncorrectable distortion
occurs when trying to Image the celestial sphere onto a flat focal plane. (See Sec. 5.1.)

!t(o,l2l2

Object Plane (RadIus = RJ

Ground Object (Reid 01 VIew)
A = nR 2 =n (h tan(OI2»2
Contains One or More Ground
Resolution Elements

eoretht
Rg.9-8. Optical Characteristics of a Refractive System. Note one-to-one correspondence of
the ground-resolution elemenfs size to the pixel size at the image plane. The operating
wavelength is A. As resolution elements move away from nadir, flat-Earth approximations become less precise. See Chap. 5 for additional details.

Curvature of FIeld = when a sharp image Is formed on a focal surface which Isn't flal Can
be corrected In film systems by using a sOghtly curved focal plane.

Figure 9-9 shows the three basic types of telescopes. In each of the three, there is a
corresponding refractive and reflective instrument The aberrations which can be corrected in each type are shown in Table 9-S. The lens doublet is the classic refractive
telescope lens. The doublet can be designed to eliminate spherical aberrations, coma,
distortion and chromatic aberrations (see Table 9-S).1n tele-optic lens systems the distance between the optical element and the focal plane is shorter than the focal length.
Tele-optic lenses can eliminate spherical aberrations, coma, astigmatism, and curvature of field effects. They can also overcome chromatic aberrations. The lens triplet is
the simplest refractive (spherical) optical systelll that theoretically allows for correction of all distortions. The price we pay for this advantage is the very high sensitivity
of each of the optical elements with respect to displacement or tilt. The ray traces in

Space Payload Design and Sizing

262

Refractive

9.3

Background

9.3

doublet, and the Cassegrain telescope is a reflective implementation of a tele-optic
lens. The Three-Mirror Anastigmatic system is comparable to the lens triplet with
respect to all the aberration corrections, but with an all-reflective design. Reflective
optical systems generally are free from chromatic aberrations. However, reflective
systems typically have a much smaller field of view than their refractive counterparts.
In reality, optical systems for space remote sensing are far more complex because
the technologies for manufacturing the lenses and mirrors are limited and other effects
such as thermal distortions and radiation effects can alter the performance of the
instrument Thermal distortions can limit the performance of an optical system, even
if the operating temperature range is regulated within a few degrees for high performance optical systems, and cosmic radiation effects can degrade the transparency of
most optical glass over time. Figure 9-10 shows the lens cross section of the highresolution optical lens system of the German-built Modular Optoelectronic Multispectral Scanner (MOMS 2P) instrument designed to achieve 6 m resolution on the ground.

Reflective

(A) Lens Doublet

(E) CassegraIn

(8) Tele-op1lc

nr-. r L ) ,
T
(C) Lens TrIplet

Basic Configurations for Refractive and RefIecUve Optical Systems. Each of the
reflective systems on the right Is analogous to the corresponding refractive system on
the left. TMA = Three-mirror anastigmatic.

Fig. 9-9.

\

~
~

~~

\\
lJ

....r

\

J
~

TABLE 9-8. Aberrations that can be Corrected by the Three Basic Optical Systems.
Checks indicate errors that are fully correctable and parenthetical checks Indicate
that corrections are possible only for dedicated design parameters. (See Table 9-7
for definitions).

Rg.9-10.

-.......=:r

\
I
'-..J

'--

Lens Cross SectIon of the Panchromatic Objective of the MOMS 2P Instrument
The sensor has a focal length of 0.66 m and an aperture size of 0.15 m. The
complexity of this optical system Is representative of sophisticated remote sensing
payloads.
\

Image Error

Doublet/Schmldt

TeleOptlclCassegraln

TripletlTMA

Lateral Chromatic Aberration

~

~

~

9.3.3 Diffraction Limited Resolution

Length Chromatic Aberration

~

~

~

Spherical Aberration

~

~

~

Coma

~

~

~

(~)

~

(~)

~

(~)

~

The resolution of an optical system is its ability to distinguish tine detail. In general
resolution is expressed in angular terms. Thus, a telescope that can just distinguish or
resolve two stars which are very close together is said to have a resolving power equal
to the angular separation of the stars. For Earth observing systems we are more interested in the ability to see or resolve tine detail on the surface. Thus, for these systems
resolution is commonly expressed in terms of the size of an object On the Earth that
can just be distinguished from the background. To read this page requires a resolution
of about 0.1 mm, whereas you may be able to distinguish a large newspaper headline
with a resolution of 1 cm.
No matter how good the quality of the lens or mirror, a fundamental limitation to
resolution is diffraction, the bending of light that occurs at the edge of the optical system. Even for a perfect optical system, diffraction causes the image of a point source
oflight, such as a distant star, to a~ not as a point on the focal plane but as a series
of concentric circles getting successively dimmer away from the center, as shown in

AstIgmatism
Distort/on
Curvature of Field

(~)

Fig. 9-9 indicate different locations of the image in the focal plane corresponding to
various viewing angles. The lens triplet compensates for all five of the third-order
aberrations: spherical aberrations, coma. astigmatism. curvature of field, and distortion. It too is free from chromatic aberrations. The same behaviors are present in the
corresponding reflective systems. The Schmidt Mirror System is an all-reflective

Space Payload Design and Sizing

264

9.3

Fig. 9-11. This pattern is called the diffraction disk, the Airy disk·, or the pOintspread
function. The angular distance, 9" from the maximum at the center of the image to the
first dark interference ring, called the Rayleight limit, or Rayleigh diffraction criteria,
is given by
9,

= 1.22AID

(9-9)

where A is the wavelength, D is the aperture diameter of the optical instrument, and 9,
is expressed in radians. The bright maximum at the center of the Airy disk, out to the
first interference minimum, contains 84% of the total energy which arrives at the focal
plane from a point source. For a satellite at altitude, h, the linear resolution or ground
resolution, X, at nadir is just
X' = 2.44 hAID

(9-10)

where we have replaced the radius from Eq. (9-9) with the diameter of the resolution
element In this expression, h can be replaced by the slant range, Rs, from Eq. (5-28),
to determine the resolution away from nadir (Rs here = D in Chap. 5). Note however,
that this is the resolution perpendicular to the line of sight and is made larger (i.e.,
worse) by I1sin E., where e is the elevation angle at the orbital point in question,
obtained from Eq. (5-26a). The ground resolution at nadir for several typical wavelengths and aperture diameters is given in Table 9-9.

Background

9.3

265

resolution for a given aperture. For Q > 1, the resolution is limited by pixel size. This
will be done if image quality is less important than aperture size, as would be the case,
for example, when increased light gathering power is required. As a starting point for
the design, select Q =I, which allows good image qUality.
From the definition of the magnification, Eq. (9-6), we have:
dIX=d'IX'=flh

(9-12)

and from the small angle approximation for the angular resolution, 9" we have:
9, = tan 9, =d'/(2/) = 1.22i1.ID

(9-13)

Combining Eqs. (9-11) to (9-13), we obtain expressions for the pixel size, d, in terms
of the other basic system parameters:
d = d'XIX'= d'Q = (2.44 il.fID) Q

(9-14)
where the parameters are defined above and, as usual, Ais the wavelength,fis the focal
length, and D is the aperture diameter.

•

I

~pixel

Aperture

d'

/<iE=::.....,==:;-;-;::~"'rl-k=-_ _-.....-::-...::O::;rb:::ltc.:.:H::::elght.=~h_ _ _--l

Fig. 9-11.

-'--------I

8ement,
X'

Point Spread
Funclion

lId

d'

Ground
Resolution

I
I

• 0<1

Point Spread Function for imaging System with Diffraction. The optical wave
front from an Ideal point source on the ground Is Imaged as the point spread function
by the optical system. The diameter of the aperture and the wavelength determine the
extent of the point spread function measured by the diamater, d~ of the first intensity
minimum.

When we implement an optical system using a detector array, we add an additional
design parameter, the quality factor, Q, defined as the ratio of the pixel size, d, to the
diameter of the diffraction disk or point spread function, d', i.e.,
Q =dld'=XIX'

Ag.9-12.

Effect of Varying Quality Factor. Different sizing of the detector pixel with respect
to the point spread function Is shown by varying the Quality Factor, Q. A large quality
factor results in the relative sizing in the diagram on the left and a low quality factor
results in the relative sizing in the diagram on the right.

TABLE 9-9. DlffracUon-Umlted Resolution. Note that the Synthetic Aperture Radar provides
resolutions similar to visual or IR systems, Independent of range and wavelength
for ranges up to the maximum signal·te-nolse 6mit by synthesizing the required
aperture.
Ground Resolution

(9-11)

where d' is the diameter of the first minimum in the diffraction image (i.e., twice the
angular resolution), X is the ground pixel size, and X'is the ground resolution = diameter on the ground corresponding to d' on the focal plane (see Fig. 9~ 12). Q typically
ranges from 0.5 to 2. For Q < I, the pixels are smaller than the diffraction disk and
resolution is limited by diffraction in the optics. This gives the best possible image
• Named for Sir George Airy, the British Astronomer Royal from 1835 to 1881.
t Named for Sir John Rayleigh, a 19th centmy British physicist and 4th recipient of the Nobel
prize for physics.

From an orbiting spacecraft at h =900 km
From a synchronous
spacecraft
(h = -35,800.km)
From SR·71 at
h = 20 km (70,000 ft)

=2.44 h).jlJ

Aperture
Size, D

Visible
[A= 0.5!J.111]

IR
[A= 3!J.111]

Passive Microwave
[f= 10 GHz; A= 3 cm]

1m

1.1 m

6.59m

1m

43.7m

262m

=40.9 miles
22 km =13.6 mDes
2,620 km =1,630 miles

3m

14.6m

87.4m

874 km = 543 mDes

0.3m

0.081 m
=3.19 In.

O.488m

4.88km

3m

0.366 m

=14.4 in.

22m

65.9 km

266

Space Payload Design and Sizing

9.4

9.4 Observation Payload Design
The electromagnetic radiation that forms the basis of remote sensing arises as a
by-product of energy being transferred from one form to another. In general, transformation processes that are more random produce wider bandwidth signatures, while
a more organized process produces a more coherent return [Elachi, 1987]. For
example, heat generated by a diesel motor is radiated over a wide bandwidth in the
infrared spectrum, while a laser (a more organized energy transformation) generates
narrow bandwidth radiation. In spacecraft remote sensing we are concerned with
processing measurements from four primary spectral types.
Visible systems operate from the ultraviolet (- 0.3 J1ID) to the red end of the visual
spectrum (-0.75 J1ID). They offer the potential for high spatial resolution because of
their short wavelengths, but can only operate in daylight because they depend on
reflected sunlight.
Infrared systems operate in various bands throughout the infrared spectrum
(-1-100 J1ID) subject to atmospheric transmission windows. Infrared sensors can
operate both day and night since the detected signal is a function of the emissivity of
the scene (although the signatures will be different by day and night).
Microwave radiometers operate in the radio frequency range, chiefly at the millimeter wavelengths (20-200 GHz). Their resolution is three to five orders of magnitude
worse than visible wavelength sensors with the same aperture size, but they are
capable of collecting unique information over large areas. Typically, microwave
sensor require extensive ground-truth calibration data to interpret the measurements.
RtuJor systems are active instruments which provide their own illumination of the
scene in the centimeter to millimeter bands. The reflected signals can be processed to
identify physical features in the scene. Radar systems can be designed to penetrate
most atmospheric disturbances, such as clouds, because only larger features can reflect
signals at radar wavelengths. Cantafio [1989] provides an extended discussion of
space-based radar.
There are a number of different approaches for linking the fundamental physics of
the Planck function to the practical design of remote sensing systems. Hovanessian
[1988] treats emitted radiation as a signal to be detected and considers remote sensing
essentially as a special case of antenna and propagation theory (even in the visible
spectrum). Elachi [1987] begins with Maxwell's equations and focuses on the features
of electromagnetic radiation, such as quantum properties, polarization, coherency,
group and phase velocity, and Doppler shift to derive strategies for exploiting these
features in different parts of the frequency spectrum. McCluney [1994] draws on the
parallels between the science of radiometry and remote sensing in general and the
science of the human eye as expressed in the literature of photometry. These references
provide detailed, application-specific derivations beginning with Planck's Law. Our
focus for the remainder of this chapter will be on engineering applications and rulesof-thumb to define and design remote sensing payloads.
Observation geometry, effective aperture, integration time, detector sensitivity,
spectral bandwidth, transmission through the atmosphere, and ground pixel size determine the radiometric performance of an optical instrument. Depending on the spectral
range, we define three basic categories of Earth observation. In the first case, the
optical instrument receives reflected radiation from the surface of the Earth when it is
illuminated by the Sun. The thermal emitted radiation of the Earth's surface is negligible in this case. The frequency range covered by this case includes the visible wave-

9.4

Observation Payload Design

267

length (0.4-0.78 J.Ull), the near infrared wavelength (0.78-1 pm), and the short
wavelength infrared (1-3 J1ID).
The second case involves optical instruments receiving emitted radiation from the
surface of the Earth when the reflected radiation of the sun is negligible. This condition
holds for the long wavelength infrared region (8-14 J1ID). The third case applies to the
mid-wavelength infrared spectral region (3-5 J1ID) where we must consider contributions from direct and reflected sources. Figure 9-13 shows the radiance available from
direct and. reflected radiation sources. Corresponding to Planck's law, the thermal
emitted radiance of the Earth (modeled at 290 K) increases with wavelength for the
spectral region shown. The reflected radiance from the Earth's surface decreases with
wavelength.
107

.-

Reflected
'\ Sunlight

.~

1.co
'i

\

E

<t

!

108

J

......

-

Earth

Thermal - Radlatlon-

l/

'\

T~1
........

8
Iii

"<.'"\

i

.

"V
/

-1
2

Fig. 9-13.

.#

3

1\.
4

"
5

,
6

7

8

9

10

Radiance from Direct and Reflected Sources. Radiance contribution In W per
square meter per meter (wavelength) per unit solid angle of reflected sunOght from
the Earth and emitted radiation from the Earth as a function of wavelength. The sum
Is shown as a dashed nne. The Sun Is modeled as a blackbody with a temperature of
6,000 K, the reflection coefficient of the Earth's surface and the transmission of the
atmosphere are modeled as constants for clarity.

In the visual and near IR (0.7 to 1.0 J.lIll) bands, we resolve images produced by

energy (chiefly from the Sun) reflected from the target scene rather than energy from
the very limited self-emissions that occur in the visible band. But in the infrared. we
see things almost entirely by their self-emission, with very little energy being reflected,.
particularly atnight. We may use the same optical train elements-lenses, prisms,
mirrors, and fllters-to collect infrared energy as for visible and UV, but we must
apply them differently. For example, ordinary glass is opaque to IR beyond 3 p.m,
whereas germanium, which is opaque in the visible band, is transparent in the 1.8 to
25-J1ID region. Further, we must consider atmospheric scattering caused by aerosols
and particles in the air. The amount of scattered radiation is a function of the inverse
fourth power of the wavelength. Thus, IR penetrates haze and dust much better than
visible radiation because the IR wavelengths are four or more times those in the visible

268

Space Payload Design and Sizing

9.4

Observation Payload Design

9.4

269

spectrum. The same phenomena explain the reddish color of the sky near dawn and
sunset. At these times, shorter green, blue indigo, and violet wavelength signals are
greatly attenuated as they travel farther through the atmosphere than when the Sun is
overhead.
9.4.1 Candidate Sensors and Payloads

Electro-optical imaging instruments use mechanical or electrical means to scan the
scene on the ground.. Spacecraft in geostationary orbits perceive very little relative
motion between the scene and the spacecraft, so an optical instrument needs to scan in
two dimensions to form an image. A common approach for geostationary imaging
spacecraft, such as ESA's meteorological spacecraft, METEOSAT, involves placing
a large scan mirror in front of the instrument's optics to perform the north-south scan.
Rotation of the spacecraft around a north-south axis performs the east-west scan.
Three-axis stabilized spacecraft in geostationary orbits frequently use a two-axis scan
mirror in front of the optics to scan the scene in two dimensions. Alternatively, we can
use a two-dimensional matrix imager, which maps each picture element (pixel) in the
imager to a corresponding area on the ground. Scanning the scene then becomes a
process of sampling the two-dimensional arrangement of pixels in the imager.
Spacecraft in low-Earth orbits move with respect to the scene. The sub-spacecraft
point moves along the surface of the Earth at approximately 7,000 mls (see Chap. 5).
This motion can replace one of the scan dimensions, so the scanning system of the
optical instrument needs to perform only a one-dimensional scan in the cross-track
direction. Whiskbroom sensors scan a single detector element that corresponds to a
single pixel on the ground in the cross-track direction. Fig. 9-14A illustrates this technique. Whiskbroom scanners can also use several detectors to reduce the requirements
compared to a single detector. Each detector element corresponds to a pixel on-ground
(see Fig. 9-14B), and the dwell time per pixel is multiplied by the number of detector
elements used.
Push broom scanners use a linear arrangement of detector elements called a line
imager covering the full swath width. The name "push broom" comes from the
read-out process, which delivers one line after another, like a push>broom moving
along the ground track. Each detector element corresponds to a pixel on-ground.
Fig. 9-14C illustrates this technique. The ground pixel size and the velocity of the
sub-spacecraft point define the integration time.
Step-and-stare scanners use a matrix arrangement of detector elements (matrix
imager) covering a part or the full image. Each detector element corresponds to a pixel
on-ground. Fig. 9-14D illustrates this technique. Step-and-stare systems can operate in
two basic modes. The first mode uses integration times that are chosen as in the case
of the push broom sensor for which the ground pixel size and the velocity of the subsatellite point determine the integration time. Thus, no advantage with respect to the
integration time is achieved, but a well known geometry within the image is guaranteed. We need a shutter OF equivalent technique, such as a storage zone on the imager,
to avoid image smear during read-out. The second mode allows a longer integration
time if the image motion is compensated to very low speeds relative to the ground. We
can do this by shifting the imaging matrix in the focal plane or by moving the line of
sight of the instrument by other means to compensate for the movement of the subspacecraft point Step-and-stare sensors require relatively complex optics if they must
cover the full image size. An additional complexity is that the fixed pattern noise has
to be removed from the image, since each pixel has a somewhat different responsive-

A. Slngle-element WhIskbroom Sensor

B. MuJtJ-element WhIskbroom Sensor
De\ecIor pixels

arranged In a \wi).
dimensional matrix
corresponding to
the ground pbcel
arrangement

l1li
C. Push Broom Sensor
FIg. 9-14.

D. Matrix Imager

ScannIng TechnIques for EJectro-OptJcal Instruments. (A) Shows a whiskbroom
scanner with a single detector element which scans one line after another across the
swath. The swath width must be scanned In the time Interval the sub-spacecraft point
moves down one ground pixel length. (8) Shows a whiskbroom scanner with multiple
detector elements which scan multiple Ones across the swath at a time. The swath
width must be scanned In the time Interval the sub spacecraft point moves down the
multiple ground pixel length. (C) Shows a push broom scanner with multiple "nearly
arranged detector elements which scan one line across the swath per integration
time. The Integration time Is usually seJ to the time Interval the SlJb.spacecraft point
moves down one ground pixel length. (0) Shows a step-and-stare scanner with
detector elements arranged In a matrix which scan the fuD Image per integration time.
The Integration time Is usually set to the time Interval the slJb.spacacraft point needs
to move down one ground pixel length.

ness and dark signal. Table 9-10 summarizes the distinguishing features of optical
scanning methods.
An alternate approach for capturing the scene using matrix imagers involves
positioning of the scene with respect to the instrument. To image the entire scene, the
instrument shifts, or "steps," to the next part of the scene (along-track and/or acrosstrack) after the integration period. This approach is referred to as a step-and-stare
imager. If it only covers a part of the required scene, then moderately complex (and
~so moderately sized) optics is required. We can use highly agile and ~ pointmg mirrors in front of the instrument's optics to adjust the line of sight. For example,
the Early Bird satellite avoids the complexity of large matrix imagers or sophisticated

270

Space Payload Design and Sizing

TABLE 9-10. Comparison of Optical Sensor Scanning Methods. We list relative advantages
and disadvantages of different scanning mechanisms.
Advantages
Scanning Technique
Whiskbroom Scanner- High unHorm~of the response
Single Detector Element function over
scene
Relatively simple optics
Whiskbroom Scanner- UnHormity of the response
function ovei'the swath
Multiple Detector
Elements
Relatively simple optics
Uniform response function In the
Push Broom Sensor
along-track direction.
No mechanical scanner required
Relatively long dweD time
(equal to integration time)

Step-and-Stare
Imager with
Detector Matrix

Observation Payload Design

9.4

Disadvantages
Short dwell time per pixel
High bandwidth requirement and
time response of the detector

into electrons according to a conversion efficiency dictated by the characteristic spectral response. The electrons are then collected for the entire integration time for each
pixel. The read-out of the charge generated-up to one million electrons per pixel-is
performed via an analog shift register into a Serial output port. Figure 9-15 shows a
typical spectral response function for a silicon imager.

Relatively high bandwidth and
time responsa of the detector.

5.0

~

High number of pixels per line
imager required
Relatively complex optics

.!!

1
~
~
~
1/1

WeD defined geometry within the High number of pixels per matrix
imager required
image
Long integration time (H motion
Complex optics required to cover
compensation is perforriled).
the fuD image size
Calibration of fixed pattern noise
for each pixel
Highly complex scanner required
Hmotion cornpensetlon is
performed.

butting techniques of several smaller matrix imagers in favor of pointing the mirror
with high dynamics and fine pointing performance.
Optical instruments for space missions usually rely on existing detector and imager
designs. Custom tailoring of these detectors and imagers is common, however, to
optimize the design with respect to performance and cost of the instrument We make
the distinction between detectors, which consist of one or a few radiation-sensitive
elements without read-out electronics, and imagers, which usually consist of a considerable number of discrete radiation-sensitive elements combined with read-out
electronics.
We must select the materials used for detector elements depending on the spectral
range of the instrument being designed. The ability of detector elements to absorb photons relates directly to the energy of the incident photons (and consequently to the
wavelength of the radiation as well) and the effective band gap of the material. All
matter, including the detector material, generates thermal photons. Therefore, we must
lower the temperature of the detector elements such that the self-generated photons do
not degrade the signal-to-noise ratio of the instrument. This requirement becomes
more stringent as the wavelength of the radiation being detected increases. With few
exceptions, detectors and imagers have to be cooled for wavelengths in the short wave
infrared (SWIR) band and longer.
For the spectral range between 400 nm and 1,100 run, silicon detectors and imagers
are used most frequently. Silicon is attractive because it is possible to combine the
detector elements and read-out electronics in a single monolithic chip. We can produce
line imagers with a large number of elements through this process.
Incident photons on a line imager are converted to an electrical output signal in the
imager. For charge-coupled device (CCD) line imagers with read-out electronics, the
process begins when incident photons are converted by each pixel (detector element)

Z71

c
0

D-

18

a:

2.0
1.5
1.0

---- ---- --------- -.....-:::
-~
-,.,.-

1) = 1

6.7

- 1) =
1) = 0.6
::;..--.....
~1)=0.5f- - -

0.5

i

0.25

_

t

I

I'"
!

0.2
0.15
0.1

\
\

\

I
400

Fig. 9-15.

500

600

700
800
900
Wavelength (nm)

1.000

\

1.100

Spectral Response FuncUon of a SUlcon Una Imager. The spectral response is
shown In terms of the output voltage resulting from Illumination by energy density vs.
the wavelength from 400 to 1,100 nm. The imager reaches a quantum eff/cIency(generated eiectrons per incident photon), deno1ed by 1/. above 50% between 4()(HI()()
nm. Outside this wavelength region the quantum effiCiency drops to smaH values
making the imager less suitable above 900 nm.

Area array imagers, or matrix CCD imagers, provide an alternative to line imagers.
The principles of operation are essentially the same as line imagers. Area array imagers offer the advantage of undistorted geometry within the image. A disadvantage
compared to line imagers is the possible smear effect during frame transfer. There are
a variety of read-out techniques to compensate for the smear effect. Matrix imagers
can also suffer from a relatively poor fill factor of pixels in the array. Table 9-11
summarizes line and matrix imager capabilities for current systems that are at least
partially space qualified.
When radiometric performance of the optical instrument is paramount, we use time
delay and integration (TDI) methods. TOI describes an imaging principle that uses the
image motion along the rows of a matrix imager to extend. the integration time.
Integration time is extended by electronically shifting the integrating pixel cell synchronously to the movement along the row. The signal-to-noise ratio of this concept is
improved by the square root of the number of TOI stages. The primary advantage of
TOI imager systems compared to line imagers is the improved signal-to-noise ratio.
The disadvantage is the increased requirement for spacecraft attitude and orbit stability (due to the required synchronization of the shifting pixel).
We classify and select infrared detectors according to their spectral band of operation and a figure of merit called specific detectivity or quantum efficiency for photon
detectors. The operating tempemture of the detector dictates the cooling requirements

272

Space Payload Design and SJzing

9.4

TABLE 9-11". Characteristics of Imagers. Typical parameters for available nne and matrix
Imager systems. Photo response nonunlformity Is the cflfference between the most
and least sensitive element under uniform Dlumlilation. Daile signal uniformity Is
equivalent to photo response nonunlformity, but without Dlumination. fJynamjc
range Is the saturation exposure divided by the rms nolse-equlvalent exposure.
Read-out speed Is given In mOHon samples per second (Maps) per output port.
Unelmager

Characteristic

MatrIx Imager

6,000 - 9,000 pixels

Up to 1,024 x 1,024 Image pixels In
frame transfer mode

Photo response nonunlformlty

5%

5%

Dark signal nonunlformity

5%

5%

Dynamic range

10,000

5,000

Umltations on read-out speed

-10Msps

For example, 4 ports each at 20 Msps

~
:I!
!

1011

!
]

1010

..

\

1011

l1010

J

Jb

b

for the sensor focal plane. Infrared sensors often have nonnegligible time constants for
response with respect to integration time. Because of technical difficulties with combining detectors and read-out structure, the total number of pixels in an IR detector
array is limited in practice to several hundred.
We detect infrared wavelengths with thermal detectors or photon detectors. Thermal detectors exploit the fact that absorbed heat raises the temperature of the detector,
which changes its electrical characteristics. The advantage of thermal detectors is uniform response with respect to wavelength. Thermal detectors can also be operated at
ambient temperatures, although they have lower sensitivity and slower response times.
Photon detectors use absorbed photons to generate charge carriers. These systems
offer the advantages of higher sensitivity and shorter time response, but they must be
operated at low temperatures.
Infrared detectors are often rated by the specific detectivity, D*, given by

~Alif

f

273

1012

1012

!

Pixels

D*=

Observation Payload Design

9.4

109

109

loB c:(a)"-'--'-.l.....L..-'-LLw.J..L...-.L.......I-'-.L.......I
1.0 1.52.02.53458789101520253040

loB c:~:!...1.J........JL....J...l-.J........I......L..J...J...J.J..L.......I--L.....L.JL.......I
1.D 1.5 2.02.5 3 4 5878910 15 20 2530 40

Wavelength (pm)

FIg. 9-16.

Wavelength (pm)

specmc

DetectlvlUes and Operating Temperatures for Infrared Detectors.
(Courtesy of Santa Barbara Research Center.) The specific detectlvlty, 1Y,Is a normalized figure of merit for the class of Infrared detectors for which the noise (voltage
or current) Is proportional to the square root of the detector area and the electrical
noise bandwidth. The values given vs. the wavelength show a sharp cut-off to higher
wavelengths when the lower energy Incident photons no longer generate suflicient
charge carriers within the detector. Additionally, the operating mode (photo-voltaic or
photo-conductlve) and the operating temperature of the detector Is Indicated. D* can
be Interpreted as the normalized Inverse nolse-equlvalent power of the detector (with
dimensions expressed es the square root of the detector area times the square root
of the noise bandwidth dMded by the nolse-equlvalent power).

(9-15)

NEP
where A is the detector area, lifis the noise equivalent bandwidth, and NEP is the noise
equivalent power of the detector. The factor D* is strongly wavelength dependent
showing its peak value at the cut-off frequency. Figure 9-16 shows the specific detectivities and the operating temperatures for infrared detectors, and Table 9-12 gives
characteristics of infrared detector arrays with read-out electronics.
The selection of a detector or detector array (usually with a read-out multiplexer) is
driven by several factors. The primary design issues center on maximizing detectivity
in the spectraI band of interest while operating at the highest possible temperature and
a sufficiently small time constant In addition, we must consider the geometry "of the
detector and the array as well as associated calibration issues.
9.4.2 Payload Operations Concept

In addition to the technical trade-offs in spacecraft performance, the operations
concept for employing the sensor is an important consideration early in the preliminary design. We need to understand the end-to-end mission problem-not merely the
physics of collection. The entire process beginning with the ultimate users or customers
of the data needs to provide a feasible and efficient means to meet mission objectives.

TABLE 9-12. Characteristics of IR Detector Arrays with Reed-out Electronics. The table
shows detector characteristics based on material properties. (Source: Photonics
Spectra, September, 1989.)
Detector
Material
InSb
InSb
InSb
HgCdTe
HgCdTe
Sl:ln
SI:ln
HgCdTe
HgCdTe
HgCdTe
SI:Ga
SI:Ga

Usable Spectral
Operating
Response Region Temperature
Array
(I<)
(Jlm)
Configuration

3-5
3-5
3-5
3-5
3-5
3-7
3-7
8-12
8-12
8-12
8-17
8-17

77
77
77
195
195
<50
<50
77
77
77
<30
<30

128x 128
1,024 x 1
64x2
256 x 256
512x30
64x64
1,024 x 1
256 x 256
1,024 x 1
288x4
64x64
1,024 x 1

Pixel
Size
(Jlm)

Time
Constant't

100x 100
100x 100
4Ox40
100x 100
100x 100
65x65
65x65
100x 100
100x 100
25x28
75x75
75x75

0.020-0.200
0.020-0.2Ob
0.020-0.200
0.2-0.8
0.2-0.8
100
100
0.2-0.8
0.2-0.8
0.2-0.8
0.1-5
0.1-5

(J1s)

Space Payload Design and Sizing

274

9.4

The nomination of a collection task, the tasking and scheduling of the sensor, the
processing of the mission data, and the distribution of the data can dramatically
increase the complexity of the systems engineering challenge and decrease the final
accuracy of the system. Not only can physical effects such as atmospheric correction,
calibration, and rectification degrade system performance, but technical effects such
as quantization and data comPression errors can decrease the resolution of the system
from the perspective of the end user. For additional information about technical
aspects of the end-to-end throughput problem for spacecraft imagery, see Shott

Observation Payload Design

9.4

Categorizing remote sensing missions is complicated by the fact that sensors usually
have multiple uses, and they can be categorized according to any number of different
aspects, such as measurement technique (active or passive), event measured (such as
fire or deforestation), and measurement resolution (spatial, spectral, radiometric,
temporal). By way of example, however, Table 9-13 provides a small sampling of
remote sensing payloads and corresponding spacecraft missions.
TABLE ~13. Characteristics of Typical Payloads.

[1997].

The concept of operations for a spacecraft system such as Frre8at needs to account
for the full breadth of the operational mission, including different phases of the
mission and alternate operating modes. See Sec. 2.1 and Chap. 14 for a description of
a mission operations concept
For preliminary mission planning, we should pay particular attention to the pr0jected sequence of events during each mission phase (see Activity Planning in
Chap. 14). For the FtreSat mission under normal operations, a sample mission timeline
for normal operations includes the following steps:
.
I. FIre starts at some location
2. Sensor field-of-view passes over the fire

Purpose

Solar
Physics

Space
Plasma
Physics

3. Signature from the fire introduced into the sensor data stream
4. Data is passed to' the misSion ground station for analysis (or processed on
board)

High

Energy

Instrument Name

Ion Mass Spectrometer
Beam Plasma

Frequently there are several ways to meet mission requirements. How to sort
through these multiple approaches is not always obvious. The general approach we
outline provides a repeatable framework for choosing a payload to satisfy a remote
sensing mission. Once we select a physical phenomenology (e.g., measuring thermal
infrared radiance to detect forest fires), then two things need to be established. Frrst,
the radiometric measurement levels that are needed to satisfy the information need;
and second, the implications for a payload in terms of size and performance to be able
to sense the required signature.

87
30
2,000

13.5
0.4

322

500
164
500

2+
0.5
1.28
0.1

80
17

334
38

0.01
0.016

250
620
1,500

50+

2x4e1la.
3.7 x 2.7 ella.
1.6x 1.6x3
1x1x3
3e1la.x4

1,000
1,500
2,000
1,000
10,000

0.23 m sphlll8
2.8x3.7x1.4
1.5x1e1la.
2xO.7xO.9

10
808
800
239

1
3,000
800
280

120
30

1x1x2

900
1,100

500
3,000

0
0.02

7x4e1la.

6,800

8-25
kW

1.0

4.8 x 1.9 ella.
4x4x4
4.6 x 1.5 x 0.3
2Ox2x02
0.4 x 0.3 x 0.6
1.25 x 0.6 x 0.8
1.4x 1.4 x 0.5

-800
150
250
16
191
147

125
470
200
300
60
165
330

0.52
0.20
0.01
120
Low
20
0.01

2.5 x 2.5 x1

680

715 3OO(x2)

-

550

491

MalBtIsIs

Materials ExperIment Assem.
ProcsssIng SoDdlflcallon Experiment
LIfe
Sclencss

life ScIence Lab Module

EnvInm-

lbnb ScannIng RadIometer
MIcrowave RadIometer
Dual Frequency ScaIIerom.
OceanSAR
Solar Spectrum
Doppler Imager
PhotometrIc imaging

Comm.

250
465
6,600
183
1,000
128
2,000

Gamma Ray Burst
CosmIc Ray Transition
X-ray SpectromJPolarimeter
Short X-ray
HI Energy Gamma Ray Tela.
SynthetIc Aperture Radar
MuIll-8pec1ra1 Mid-IR
ThematIc Mapper

9.4.3 Required Payload Capability

Data
at28V Rate
(W)
(Mbpa)

2,000
100
500

Rssourr:es Gravily Gradlometer

mental

-

Mass
(kg)

Pwr.

(0.25)3
6.7 x 3.4 x 3.10

6. Generate appropriate messages indicating the presence of fire

We should create a concept of operations for each phase of the mission and each
operating mode of the spacecraft~including contingency and failure modes. This step
will ensure mission success within the constraints of the operating environment (See
Chap. 14.)

0.5 x 0.5 x 0.4
0.6 x 0.7 xO.7+
two 0.7 ella. ant.

Avg.

Plasma Diagnostics
Doppler Imaging Interferom.
Proton (Ion) Accelerators

Aslrophysics

7. Issue reports and notifications to appropriate authorities and research centers

Size
LxWxD
(m)

Lyman-Alpha Coronograph
2.8 x 0.88 x 0.73
2.7 x 1 ella.
X-ray Telescope SpecIrom.
7.3 x 3.8 ella.
Solar 0pUcaI Telescope
2 x 0.4 x 0.4
Solilr Magnetic VelocIIy FIeld
1x1x2
100 m Pinhole Cemera
Extreme UV Telescope
2.78 x 0.86 x 0254
1x1x3
Solar Gamma Ray SpecIrom.

5. FIre detection algorithm determines the possible presence of fire (this may be
a multistage process with a preliminary, coarse fire detection process that triggers a more precise algorithm or set of measurements)

8. Monitor the fire (this could involve switching to an alternate operating concept
that tracks the progress of the existing fire and monitors surrounding areas for
new outbreaks)

275

TORS Comm. Payload

DSCSIII

325

120

230
300

300
100

50
02
0.256
(421V)
0.01
0.10
0.03
0.025
0.003

85

+50

-

Aperlure
(m)

1.25
-

140cm2

3
2.70

-

(=

Pointing
Accu-

0.003
0.003

0.003

0.003

1
5

--

1

--

1x3
3

0.1
0.1
0.1

8x2.8
1
0.406

1-2
2.5
0.1
0.08

-4

.t:O.1

4.6xO.3
2Ox2

1
0.1

-

:1:1.5

4.8

- 0.3

-

-

:t3
:t3

The measurement techniques employed in sensors are tailored to provide information that can be exploited to understand the subject We describe the fundamental
information content provided by pasSive remote sensing instruments in terms· of
spatial, spectral, and radiometric resolution. We then introduce the basic types of

276

Space Payload Design and Sizing

9.4

~tectors and collection techniques that are employed in the design of a remote sensing
mstrument
We use various applications of imaging sensors, such as film cameras or electrooptical de~ces, to measure and analyze spatial features. Optical imaging in the visible
s~ IS the most common ,approach for applications dealing with topographic
mappmg and photogrammetry. Other sensors that rely fundamenta1ly on spatial measurements include sounders and altimeters (Kramer [1996] lists examples of these
types of sensors).
Spatial resolution is a function of many different parameters of the remote sensing
system. It isusua1ly different from the gro1!fU/ sample distance (GSD), the distance at
which the sensor spatiaIly samples the target scene for sensors that have a correspondence between detector size and ground target size. For targets with very high contrast
!o.the background, the. spatial resolution can be finer than the GSD-usua1ly however,
It IS on the order of twice the GSD. Alternatively, the spatial resolution can be characterized by the angle under which it sees the sma1lest target The sma1lest physical
features that can be discriminated using the sensor measurement characterize the limits of spatial resolution in a remote sensing system. Spatial resolution is a function of
the range from the se~or. to the target. the aperture and foca1length of the lens, and
the wavelength of the mCident energy. We can characterize the spatial resolution by
the angl~ that the sensor can resolve, or directly as the ground range in units of length
for the Size of the smaIlest object that can be discriminated.
We u.s~ spectromet.ers to ~alyze spectral content of a scene to identify the chemical
composition of the objects bemg sensed. The spectral information received by a sensor
is a composite of the spectral information emitted by all objects in the field-of-view.
TJ:te ~tral ~ontent reaching a potential multispectral FireSat payload, for example,
will mclude signatures from soil, vegetation, and cities in addition to a fire that may
be present The combined spectral content of all these features may be very different
from the spectrum of a forest fire by itself. Combining information from multiple spec~ .bands has been ~ s~cessfully to differentiate key features and maximizing the
utility of a sensor With a given spectral resolution.
We can use a multispectral sensor to uniquely determine the features within an
image. Multispectral systems typicaIly employ tens of bands. Hyperspectral and ultraspectral systems employ hundreds and thousands of spectral bands, respectively.
Following the example presented by Slater [1980, pp. 17-18], we consider a multispectral i~age of an area containing concrete, asphalt, soil, and grass. Figure 9-17
shows typical spectral reflectance for these four materials. If we have an imager with
?n1y three bits of radiometric sensitivity Oow, medium, and high), then no single
unage, whether panchromatic or filtered to a partiClllar band region could distinguish
these f?ur materials. However, a properly calibrated two-band multispectral system
can UDIquely resolve these four materials using bands in the 600-700 nm and 700900 nm wavelengths. The returns for each of these materials is shown in Table 9-14.
U~g mul~spectral sensors to study more complex scenes or to identify additional
matenals req~ more bands or narrow~r bandwidths. The number of spectral bands
and the .bandWidth of each band determine the resolving power of a spectral sensor.
We achieve hi~er spectral resolution is achieved by narrower bandwidths, but using
narrower bandWidths tends to reduce the signal-to-noise ratio for the measurement
We can also use intensity information contained in the electromagnetic field to
extract useful information for remote sensing purposes. If we have an imager with four
or more bits of sensitivity operating in the 700-900 nm wavelength, then a single

Observation Payload Design

9.4

277

0.6
,0.5

I
iII:

0.4
0.3
,0.2
0.1
0
400

600

800

Wavelength, (nm)

FIg. 11-17.

Typical Spectral Reflectance Curves fOr Grass, Concrete, Soli, and Asphalt. A
single-band low-resolution sensor cannot distinguish all 4 types, but a 2-band, lowresolution sensor can, as shown In Table 9-14 [Slater, 1980).

TABLE 11-14. Spectral Resolution for Sample Two-Band Sensor. Combining low-resolution
sensor returns for the two-band sensor can uniquely identify the four materials

from Rg.II-17.
Material
Concrete
Asphalt

Son
GlaSS

Sensor Reading

Sensor Reading

~700nm

7OO-9OOnm

Medium

High

Low

Low

Medium

Low

Low

High

image could be used to distinguish all four materials represented in Fig. 9-18. The ability to distinguish the intensity of radiance at the sensor goes beyond detecting either
the presence or absence of energy at a given wavelength. For example, if a FJreSat
sensor were being designed to detect fires based on thermal emission, then the intensity information in the thermal signature would indicate the presence of fires. The
radiometric resolution of the instrument needs to aIlow the system to discriminate
between a forest fire and a campfire, for instance.
Merely detecting the presence of thermal energy in a band region characteristic of
burning biomass is not sufficient for satisfying the FJreSat mission. The number of bits
used to represent the intensity information for a radiometric instrument will be dictated
by two practical limits [Slater, 1980, p. 19]: (1) the sigIJa1-to-noise ratio present in the
data, and (2) the level of confidence we need to differentiate between two threshold
signal levels.
Radiometric instruments measure the intensity of incoming energy_Radiometers
passively measure the intensity, while scatterometers are active instruments that measure surface roughness by sensing the backscattered field when a surface is illuminated.
Polarimeters measure the polarization state of a tranSmitted, scattered, or reflected
wave. Refer to Table 9-13 to see examples of these sensor types.

278

Space Payload Design and Sizing

9.5

The limiting factors in intensity measurement using radiometry are the signal-tonoise ratio (SNR) of the sensor and the quantization levels of the measurement device.
Applications requiring high radiometric accuracy include vegetation and soil analysis
studies, while applications such as sea surface temperature studies require less radiometric resolution.
Figure 9-18 shows the resolution characteristics of an example sensor across the
three primary dimensions. The sensor is the MODerate-resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS), a part of NASA's Earth Observing System. The MODIS scanning radiometer has 36 channels that have been selected to enable advanced studies of
land, ocean, and atmospheric processes. We will discuss applications of the MODIS
sensor to the problem of automatic fire detection in Sec. 9.6.
SpaIIaJ Resolution
(Ground Sample DlsIance)

500m

r

Observation Payload Sizing

9.5

Z79

9.5.1 Signal Processing and Data Rates
Analog signal processing is very similar for ceo read-out imagers and for infrared
imagers using an integrated mulitplexer. In both cases weak analog signals need to be
amplified and conditioned, maintaining high dynamic range and high processing
speed. Electronic signal processing at high speeds with high accuracy can become a
cost and schedule driver in the development of high-resolution instruments. Typically
we must incorporate massively parallel processing and tailored implementation technologies to allow high-speed, high-accuracy analog processing. Concerns about electromagnetic interference dictate that this processing be conducted as close to the focal
plane assembly as possible. On the other hand, strict thermal decoupling between
imagers and the heat dissipating electronics must be maintained.
For ceo imagers the dark signal typically doubles with each rise in temperature of
seven degrees. Infrared imagers are usually cooled to low temperatures; therefore, we
must minimize each heat leak to their cryostat to keep the cooling power low. The
cooling requirement becomes more stringent as the wavelength of the radiation to be
measured becomes longer. For wavelengths in the 100 J.1ID range the detectors are typically cooled to 4 K. Even small heat leaks, such as those from the necessary electrical
wiring and mechanical connection to the spacecraft, transport excess heat requiring
high cooling power.
Photon

TbnIng I Control

SpecIraI ResoIutfon

Radiometric Resolution
(DynamIc Range)

(BandwIdth)

Ag.9-18.

Instrument Control

Dimensions of ResoluUon for Two Channels of the MODIS Instrument. The
diagram Dlustrates the spatial, spectral, and radiometric dimensions of measurement
resolution for MODIS. The spetlal resolution of the 1.6 micron channel Is 500 m at a
spectral rasolution of 20 nm compared to 250 m and 40 nm for the 0.86 micron
channel. Both channels have 12-bit radiometric rasolutlon. Data from King, et aI.
[1992J.

Power Supply and Conditioning

Fig. 9-19.

9.5 Observation Payload Sizing
We must be able to estimate the size and main characteristics of the mission payload before completing a detailed design. We want to be able to look at several options
without necessarily designing each in depth. This section provides ways to compute
data rates and estimate the overall size and key parameters. In Sec. 9.6, we will apply
these values to the FtreSat example.

Block Diagram of an Optical Instrument. Photons are coDected by the CCD
Imager, then amplified and processed. The primary supporting functions of power and
control are also depicted. The sampDng process for charge coupled device signal processing typically uses correlated double sampling to eliminate reset noise.

The block diagram iri Fig. 9-19 shows the typical functional blocks found in the
electronics of an optical instrument The signal flow through the electronics begins
with the detector in the focal plane of the instrument It converts photons to analog
electrical signals, which are amplified and conditioned. Any additional signal processing is performed in the digital data processing block. The analog and digital signal

280

Space Payload Design and SiziDg

9.5

processing blocks operate syncbronously with the read-out of the imagers. The central
timing system supplies appropriate timing signals to all relevant circuit blocks to guar_
antee syncbronous operation. Because electrical signals processed in the instrument
electronics are weak, we have to pay special attention to power conditioning. Careful
filtering and clean electrical grounding must be implemented to decouple digital and
analog signals.
The instrument control computer manages the signal processing and timing functions performed by the instrument and it interfaces to the main spacecraft computer.
Depending on the design; time-tagged commands are executed by the instrument
computer or issued by the spacecraft computer.
.
Analog signal processing for CCD imagers usually involves correlated double
sampling. This technique takes two slightly time-shifted samples of the analog signal
and subtracts one from the other to extract their image-related video signal. The adaptation of this video signal to the input range of the analog-to-digital converter requires
setting gain and offset parameters for the system. Digital data processing normalizes
the imager pixels. Normalization requires that any non-uniformity in photo response
and dark signal must be removed from each. pixel. This task is frequently conducted
on board the spacecraft because some of the most straightforward data compression
algorithms become invalid if the pixels are not normalized Furthermore, signal processing for normalizing pixels may be required if we use onboard calibration methods
in the sensor.
We must select the process of normalizing pixels based on the characteristics of the
sensor. For sensors with a linear response, one- or two-point correction is sufficient
Highly nonlinear detectors, as is often the case for infrared detectors, require n-point
correction techniques. Figure 9-20 illustrates an example of two-point correction. The
offset (dark signal) and gain factor (response) are corrected by first subtracting the
individual offset value and then by dividing by the individual response for each pixel.
Output

Output

/P1xe11
I

/

All n pixels

/P1xe12

,I ""
/,,"

I~'"
"I"

••' Pixel n

•..••••.••.••.••.

••'

........•....

o=-- - - - - - . I n p u t
Rg. 9-20.

~-----_Input

Two-point Normalization of Pixel Response. The left diagram shows the original
response functions of IndMdual pixels. The right diagram shows the normaJlzed
response function of the same pixels, where the effects of the variations In offset values and responsivity values have been removed from the IndMduaJ pixels.

High-resolution optical instruments typically generate data rates on the order of
several hundred Mbps and above. To send this data stream to a ground station in real
time, the system may need several parallel channels with capacities up to 100 Mbps

Observation Payload SiziDg

9.5

281

each. If data collection is short compared to the available downlink time, a buffer
memory can reduce the downlink data rate over a longer transmission time.
The trends for future systems indicate a tendency toward more onboard information
extraction to decrease communication requirements. Several enabling technologies
and techniques include powerful data processing hardware. Software uploads to the
hardware must be possible to update and modify operational algorithms from the user
community.
Response of
the Pixels In Image on
the Focal the Focal
Plane #1
Plane #2

Image on
the Focal
Plane #1

Response of
the Pixels In Image on
the Focal the Focal
Plane #2 Plane 113

Response of
the Pixels In
the Focal
Plane 113

Half
Spatial
Frequency

•

NyquIst

UmIt
Fig. 9-21.

Clear

Clear

Mld-gray

Effect of Sampling Frequency on Image Quality. The three diagrams show Dlumination patterns having different spatial frequencies present In the scene (left of the
arrows) sampled at the same sampling frequency, thet Is, the same deteclor arrey
(right of the arrows). The response of the pixels Is shown as intensity (gray leveQ In.
the three diagrams. From left to right Sampling an Ulumination pattem with half the
spatial frequency. Sampling an D1umlnation pattem with exactly the spatial frequency
(the highest possible frequency that can be reconstructed without error). Sampling an
Dlumination pattem with twice the spatial frequency, resulting in a pixel response of
mld-gray since every pixel Is Dlumlnated over exactly half Hs area.

The spatial sampling process of pixels in an optical instrument is determined by the
geometry of the detector elements and by the scanning principles employed for the
different sensor types discussed in Table 9-8. The sampling process can introduce
errors into the image data if we don't select it properly. The Nyquistfrequency is the
lowest rate at which information with a given bandwidth must be sampled to avoid
errors. Figure 9-21 shows the effect of sampling three different illumination frequencies. The spatial frequency is defined as the inverse of the width of a black-and-white
line pair, and is expressed in line pairs per meter. The sampling process is performed
in all three cases by the same detector array (right of the arrows), that is, by the same
spatial sampling frequency, defined as the inverse of the center distance of the
sampling pixels. The maximum spatial frequency which can be reconstructed without
error after the sampling/restoration process is defined as the Nyquist frequency, which
equals half the sampling frequency, shown in the middle diagram. The response of the
detector pixels is shown as intensity (gray level) in the three diagrams. On the left,
sampling of an illumination pattern with half the spatial frequency. In the center,
sampling of an illumination pattern with exactly the spatial frequency, showing that
reconstruction of the original illumination pattern is feasible without error. (However,
if the sampling pattern is shifted by half a pixel with respect to the illumination pattern,

282

Space Payload Design and Sizing

'.5

then reconstruction fails). And on the right. sampling an illumination pattern with
twice the spatial frequency results in a pixel response of mid-gray since every detector
pixel is illuminated over half its area in the example. All samples in the third case show
the same constant value which corresponds to a spatial frtlquency of zero (line-pairs
per meter) which was not present in the original scene. This creation of new frequencies is known as aliasing. Such frequency components cannot be removed by additional processing of the reconstructed image. Furthermore, the well known techniques to
eliminate aliasing in electronic signal processing (band limiting the input signal to an
electronic sampler using a low pass filter corresponding to the Nyquist condition) are
not feasible when we sample images in the spatial domain. Usually we cannot use our
optical system as a band-limiting low pass filter since its aperture diameter and cut-off
frequency are usually defined by radiometric requirements. The result is that we usually have a certain amount of unavoidable aliasing which degrades the image quality
of such systems.

[
C
0

0.8

1\

i..
~

"\I~

0.6

'\

0.4

~

'"""'"

TheoretIcal MTF 01 aperture

'8

~

with central QbscwaIIon

:5

0.2

00

0.2

i

0.4

0.6

0.8

500

hl-+----I----1I--I--~f_+-T-+_::::~-_+_----j

oL--L_ _~L__ _~--~~-~~-~~~
400

~

1

600

800

1,000

1,200

1,400

wavelength (run)

~

1.2

~-

1.4

1.6

1.8

Spatial Frequency (F)

FIg. 9-22.

,..---.-----,-----r----,----,..----,---,

~
,.. 1,000 1-----I-4-I----+--\f.H~---+_---t__--_t_-__t

1beoteIIcaJ MTF 01 clear aperture

:::I

9.5.2 Estimating Radiometric Performance
In order to estimate the radiometric performance of optical instruments in the visible or near infrared we start with the radiometric input of the Sun shown iIi Fig. 9-23.

E

~

I

283

where D is the aperture diameter, A. is the wavelength, and h is the altitude. It is the
autocorrelation function of the effective aperture. In optical terms, the M1F is the
absolute value of the complex Optical Transfer Function (OTF) which describes h()w
the complex amplitudes of the optical wave front are transferred by an optical system
at different spatial frequencies.
The M1F describes the transfer quality of an optical system as a function of spatial
frequency. The POint-s~ function. ill~ted.in Fi~. 9-.16 .d~~ exactly the
same properties by showmg the two-dimensIOnal mtenslty distribution m the focus of
the optical system. The two are interrelated by the Fourier transform function.

1,500-

~

'fi

Observation Payload Sizing

9.5

Modulation Transfer Function of Circular Dlffractlon-Llmlted OptIcal System
SpaUaI Frequency. MTF curves for a clear circular optical system Is compared
with one having a central obscuration (as found In on-axis retJecUve telescopes). The
MTF cen be thought of as a function dependent on the spatial frequency, F, which
describes the modulation (contrast) function through the optical system (analogous
to the frequency dependent gain of an electrical transmission block). The MTF starts
at 1 for spatial frequencies near 0 and drops to 0 at the cutoff frequency, Fc :: DfJ. h.
VB.

The ModUlation Transfer Function (MTF) is the ratio of the intensity variation of
the ground scene to the intensity variation of the image at a given spatial frequency.
The cut-off frequency is that spatial frequency at which the transfer function becomes'
zero. lIigure 9-22 shows the theoretical M1F of an optical system with and without
central obscuration. The theoretical M1F can beapproxiIoated by a line starting at 1
when the spatial frequency is 0 and falling to 0 at the cut-offfrequency, Fe =DIAh,

Rg. 9-23.

Solar RadIometric Input. Radiometric Input (radiance In Wrrr2 rrr1 [wavelength]) of
the Sun at sea level as a function of the wavelength.

The integration of the spectral radiometric input over the spectral bandwidth gives
the power density in the spectral band of interest To first-order we can assume that
lambertian (ideal) reflection with a constant reflection coefficient occurs at the target
scene (this approximation holds for small spectral bandwidth). The area of the ground
pixel resulting in back-radiated power determines the power density per solid angle.
The atmosphere attenuates this radiation by a constant transmission factor (again
invoking an approximation for small spectral bandwidth). The effective aperture at
orbital altitude collects a very small fraction of this radiation resulting in the power at
the entrance of the optics. The signal power is attenuated further by transmissi()n
through the optics, ultimately resulting in a lower power level at the detector pixe1.
During the integration period a certain amount of energy (power times integrati()n
period) is accumulated in each pixel. This energy is divided by the energy of Olle
photon (which is wavelength dependent) resulting in the number of available photOIls
per pixe1. The quantum efficiency of the detector transforms this number of photOIlS
into the number of available electrons. These electrons comprise a charge packet and
correspond to the output signal of the detector.
.
To fully characterize the radiometric performance of an instrument. we must also
determine the signal-to-noise ratio and dynamic range. The signal-to-noise ratio

284

Space Payload Design and Sizing

95

describes the image quality at a given intensity. Due to the quantum nature of light, the
number of noise electrons (temporal noise) equals the square root of the number of
signal electrons. The read-out process of the imagers results in a certain number of
additional noise electrons. The temporal noise is added to the read-out noise since they
are statistically independent values, resulting in a total number of noise electrons to be
considered for the evaluation of the signal-to-noise ratio.
The dynamic range of the instrument is the quotient of signal- and read-out noise
electrons the sensor sees between dark and bright scenes at the given reflection coefficient of the target scene. The maximum dynamic range is the difference between the
darkest and brightest possible scene. The brightest scene is typically reflection from
clouds or snow.
In order to estimate the radiometric performance of optical instruments in the midand long-wavelength infrared spectrum, the spectral emission of the surface of the
EarJ:h must be modeled. A blackbody with an equivalent temperature of 290 K can be
used for this purpose. The atmospheric transmission as a function of the wavelength is
well known for a given path orientation and atmospheric characteristics. The multiplication of the spectral radiance with the atmospheric transmission results in the
upwelling radiance at the sensor. The integration of it over the selected bandwidth and
the multiplication with the area of the ground pixel results in the power per solid angle.
After consideration of sensor altitude and effective apertuIl; of the receiving optics the
input power at the sensor's entrance aperture can be calculated. This transforms via the
optical transmission factor to the input power at detector level (usually in the picoWatt
region). During the integration period a certain amount of energy is accumulated per
pixel. The division of that energy by the energy of one photon gives the number of
photons available per pixel which is transferred by the quantum efficiency to the available number of electrons per pixel which correspond to its output signal.
To characterize the radiometric performance of an instrument with respect to the
temperature resolution, we must determine the noise-equivalent temperature difference ~T) for the instrument The noise equivalent temperature resolution is given
by the temperature difference (at scene temperature), which generates a signal equivalent to the total noise electrons at scene temperature. The NEAT characterizes the
instrument in its ability to resolve temperature variations for a given background
temperature.

9.5

Observation Payload Sizing

285

The most straightforward approach is to use an analogy with existing systems. To
do this, we turn to the list of existing payloads in Table 9-13 in Sec. 9.4.3 or other payloads that we may be aware of which have characteristics matching the mission we
have in mind. Kramer [1996] offers a very thorough list of existing sensors. We look
for payloads whose performance and complexity match what we are trying to achieve
and make a first estimate that our payload will have characteristics comparable to the
previously designed, existing payload. While this approach is rough, it does provide a
first estimate and some bounds to decide whether the approach we have in mind is
reasonable.
A second approach, described in more detail below, is scaling the payload estimate
from existing systems. This can provide moderately accurate estimates of reasonable
accuracy if the scale of the proposed payload does not differ too greatly from current
payloads. In addition, scaling provides an excellent check. Most existing payloads
have been carefully designed and optimized. If our new payload is either too large or
too smaIl relative to prior ones, there should be some reason for this change in characteristics. If more detailed estimates based on detailed budgets don't scale from existing
systems, we must understand why.
The most accurate process for first-order payload sizing is budgeting by components. Here we develop a list of payload components such as detectors, optics, optical
bench, and electronics. We then estimate the weight, power, and number of each. This
is the best and most accurate approach but may be very difficult to apply at early mission stages because we simply don't have enough initial information. Ultimately, we
will size the payload with budgeting by components. We will develop budgets as outlined in Chap. 10 for each payload instrument for weight, power, and any critical
payload parameters. These budgets will then help us monitor the ongoing payload
development However, even with a detailed budget estimate, it is valuable to use
scaling as a check on component budgeting. Again, we wish to understand whether the
components scale from existing payloads and, if not, why not.
Scaling from Existing Systems
An excellent approach for preliminary design is to adjust the parameters in
Table 9-13 to match the instrument we are designing. We will scale the instruments
based on aperture-a main design parameter that we can determine from preliminary
mission requirements. To scale, we compute the aperture ratio, R, defined by

9.5.3 Estimating Size, Weight, and Power

We must be able to estimate the size and main characteristics of the mission payload before completing a detailed design. We want to be able to look at several options
without necessarily designing each in depth. This section provides ways to compute
data rates and estimate the overall size and key parameters. In Sec. 9.6.1, we will apply
these values to the FireSat example.
We have looked in some detail at the design of specific observation payloads in
Sec. 9.4. However, irrespective of the nature of the particular payload, we would like
to estimate its size, weight, and power even before we have done a detailed design. To
do so, we can use three basic methods:

(9-16)
where Ai is the required aperture of our new instrument, and Ao is the aperture of a
similar instrument (Table 9-13). We then estimate the size, weight, and power based
on ratios with the selected instrument from Table 9-13, using the following:

Lj""RLo

L = linear dimensions

(9-17)

Si""Lt

S = swface area

(9-18)

• Analogy with existing systems

Vj""I<

V=volume

(9-19)

• Scaling from existing systems

Wi ""KR3Wo
P j ""KR3po

W=weight

(9-20)

P=power

(9-21)

• Budgeting by components

286

Space Payload Design and Sizing

9.5

The factor K should be 2 when R is less than 0.5, and 1 otherwise. This reflects an
additional factor of 2 in weight and power for increased margin when scaling the system down by a factor of more than 2. When the system grows, the R3 term will directly
add a level of margin. For instruments more than a factor of five smaller than those
listed in Table 9-13, scaling becomes unreliable. We recommend assuming a mass
density of 1 gmIcm3 and power density of 0.005 W/cm3 for small instruments. An
example of these computations for FireSat is in Sec. 9.6.1.
9.5.4 Evaluate Candidate Payloads

Multi-attribute performance indices can be defined for comparing optical instruments with similar performance characteristics, For high-resolution spatial
instruments three basic values describe the quality (corresponding to the information
content) in the image. The three defining features are the signal-to-noise ratio at spatial
frequency zero (high SNR corresponds to high information content), the MTF of an
instrument at the Nyquist frequency (high MTF corresponds to high information
content for sampling rates between zero and the Nyquist frequency), and the ground
sample distance GSD (small GSD corresponds to high information content). We
define a relative quality index (RQI) to allow straightforward quantitative comparisons with a reference instrument denoted by the suffix ref.
SNR MTF GSDref
RQI = SNR,q MTFref GSD

Observation Payload Sizing

9.5

21'1h V.
~
V.
DR = _'_".J..., b =:: _"'W_,.J..., b
X Y
X Y

bits/second (bps)

(9-23)

where 11 is the maximum look angle in radians. h is the orbit altitude, Vg is the spacecraft ground-track velocity, Sw is the swath width, X is the across-track pixel dimension, and Y is the along-track pixel dimension. The approximation is good for small
swath widths. The data rate can be increased by transmission overhead such as housekeeping data or coding and it can be decreased by data compression. (See Sees. 2.1.1,
13.22, and 15.3.2.).
TABLE 9-15. CalculaUon DesIgn Parameters for a Passive OpUcal Sensor.
Step

CalculaUon

FIreSat

Comments

Step 1. DefIne Orb" Parameters

Define orbllal altitude, h Design parametert

h=700km

See Table 3-4, Sec. 7.4

Compute orbit period, P Eq. (7-7),IRC*

P=98.8 min

Assumes circular orbll

Compute ground track
velocity, Vg

Eq. (5-31),IRC-

Vg = 6.76 kmls Assumes circular orbit

Compute node shift, AI. Eq. (7·13), IRC-

AI. = 24.8 deg Function of inclination

Step 2. DefIne Sensor Viewing Parameters

(9-22)

This relative quality index allows the designer to trade requirements with respect to
each other. For example, a higher SNR can compensate for a lower MTF at the Nyquist
frequency for a given GSD. Such comparisons allow for first-order insights into the
relationships between complexity, performance, and cost of candidate sensors. For
example, suppose we defme a reference instrument to have an SNR of 512, and an
MTF of 0.5 and a GSD of 25 m. If we then compute design parameters for a particular
mission, we can generate a relative quality index, or score, for our design with respect
to the reference instrument For instance, if our design choices lead us to an instrument
with a SNR of 705.2. a MTF of 0.47 and a GSD of 30 m, then the RQI for this system
will be 108%. This index offers a straightforward method for comparing several competing sensors across three key performance measures.

Compute angular
radius of the Earth, P

p=64.3deg

Depends on orbllal
altitude

Dmmr=
3,069km
1A=70deg

Depends on orbllal
altitude

Compute sensor look Eqs. (5-24) or
angle (= nadir angle), 11 (5-25b), IRC'

71 = 57.9 deg

Will be less than p

Compute min. elav.
angle, £ = 90° - IA

Eqs. (5-25b) and
(5-26), IRC'

£=20 deg

If max. ECAmmr given,
computes

Compute max. Earth
Eqs. (5-25b) and
central angle, ECAmmr (5-26), IRC-

"ECAmmr=

If £ given, compute

Computemax.dIstance Eq. (5-17),IRCto the horizon, Dmmr
Define max. incidence
ang. lA, or max. Earth
can. ang. ECAmmr

Compute slant

9.5.5 Observation Payload Design Process

Table 9-15 contains the details of the design process for visible and infrared
systems. We begin with basic design parameters such as the orbital height, minimum
observation angle and ground resolution. We then compute the quantities that describe
the performance of the instrument In particular, we determine the pixel processing
parameters and system data rate, the size of the optics for a given pixel size, and the
radiometry of the sensor. Sample computations for the FrreSat payload are given in the
third column.
The data rate required for observation payloads depends on the resolution, coverage, and amplitude accuracy. With the maximum look angle, 11, spacecraft altitude, h,
and cross-track pixel size, X, we have to image 211h I X pixels per swath line (crosstrack). With the spacecraft ground-track velocity Vg and the along-track pixel size Y
we have to scan Yg I Y swath lines in one second. If we quantify the intensity of
each pixel by b bits (2b amplitude levels) we generate a data rate, DR, of

Eq. (5-15), IRC-

Design parameter, IRe-

ECAmmr
Rs=1,578km Rs here = D In Chap. 5

12.1 deg

Eq. (5-27), IRC-

range, Rs
And swath width

Adjust swath width for
good coverage
(Sec. 7..4)

=2ECAmmr

2ECAmax=

Determines coverage

24.2deg

Step 3, DefIne Pixel Parameters and Data Rate
Design parameter
Ymax =68m Based on spatial
track ground sampling
resolution requirements
dIst, Ymmr
atECAmax
Determine Jnstan.
One pixel width
'FOV=
'FOV= Ymax • 180deg
taneous field of view,
O.OO245deg
Specify max. along-

'FOV

Rs

7t

Rnd max. cross-track
Driven by resolution
Xmax=
Ymmr
pixel resolution, XmtlJI'
199.6m
requirement at
Xmmr = cos(lA)
at ECAmmr
maximum slant range
• IRC co parameter tabulated on the Insfde Rear Cover for Earth SateJDtes Parameters.
tcaJcuJatlons are based on a circular orbll

Space Payload Design and Sizing

288

9.5

TABLE 9-15. Calculatlon Design Parameters for a Passive Optical Sensor. (ContInued)
Step

Calculation
RreSat
Comments
Step 3. Define Pixel Parameters and Data Rete (Continued)

Determine cross-track
ground pixel resolution,
X, at nadir
Determine along-track
pixel resolution, Yo
at nadir
Determine no. of
cross-track pixels, Zc
And no. of swaths
recorded along-track
In 1 sec,Za

X=30m

Best cross-track
resolution for this
instrument

Y=30m

Best along-track
resolution for this
Instrument

X = 'FOV'h(_n_)

180deg

Y = 'FOV 'h(_n_)

180deg

Z _ 2'71
e - 'FOV

Za

Vg ·1 sec
Y

-

Zc=4.7x1()4

Ground pixel size varies
along the swath

Za=225.6

Number of successive
swaths without gaps at
nadir

And no. of pixels
recorded in 1 sec., Z

Z=Zc,Za

Z=1.06x107

Specify no. of bits
used to encode
each pixel, B

Design parameter

8bita

Compute data rate,

DR=Z'B

DR

Based on radiometric
resolution requirement
and dynamic range

DR=85Mbps Large number may
challenge downlink
capacity

Step 4. DefIne Sensor Integration Parameters
Specify no. of pixels for Design parameter
whiskbroom inst Nm

Nm = 256

And pixel integration
period, T,

1j = 24.1 J.IS

1j

=2:.. Nm
Vg

Integration time of
each detector pixel

Zc

And resulting pixel
Fp = 111j
realk>ut frequency, Fp

Fp=42 kHz

Verify datector time

Tdst< 1j

constant, Tdst, Is

Must be large enough
to allow sufficient
integration time

Tdst< 1j

smaOer than 1j

Compare with
physical properties
in Table 9-12.

Step 5. Define Sensor Optics

Observation Payload Sizing

9.5

TABLE 9-15. calculation Design Parameters for a Passive Optical Sensor. (ContInued)
calculation

Step

F/reSat

Compute F-number
of optics, F#

F#=fID

F#=2.7

Typical range = 4-6

FOV=

FOVforthe.
array of pixels

Compute field of view FOV = 'FOV' Nm
of optical system, FOV

0.628deg

Determine cut.off
frequency, Fa

Fe=DIA.h

Fa =0.09
line palrs/m

Referred to nadir

Determine cross-track
Nyquist frequency, Fnc

Fnc=1I2X

Fnc =
0.0171p/m

Referred to ground pixel
resolution at nadir

Determine along-track
Nyquist frequency, Fna

Fna = 112Y

Fna =
0.0171p/m

Referred to ground pixel
resolution at nadir

~ = 19"10
qa = 19%

% of the cutoff
frequency used
for this case

Compute relative
Nyquist frequencies,
Fqc and Fqa

F.

Fna

Fqc = ;; ; Fqa = -

Fa

e

FInd optics PSF as a
PSF(r) = [A. J, (.2) I
function of distance, r, ZsnrDIA.f
from center of detector

Zf-

FInd optical modulation M1Fo(F) = (2C In)
transferfunclion (M1Fo)
for clear circular optics
7t
C
]
~ aslnC
2 Fe 1-&

SeeAgs.
9-26Aand B

Use -2d< r< 2d

J, Is the Bessel function
of order 1

See Ag. 9-26B Use 0 S F S Fa

x[

CsF/Fe

Step 6. EstImate Sensor Radiometry (for NadIr VIewing)
Compute detector MTF M1Fx= [sln(Fx)l1'5d2
cross-track,M1Fx,and M1Fy = Isln(FY)IFY I
along-track, MTFy

See Ag. 9-22

Compute system MTF
cross-track, MTFs

MTFs(F)=

See Ag. 9-22

Let Frange: 0 S FS Fa

Define equivalent
blackbody temp. T .

Design parameter

T=290K

Blackbody temperature
of the Earth

Define the operating
bandwidth, AA

Design parameter

AA = 1.911ffi

Based on subJect trades

Determine blackbody
spectral radiance, LA"

LA = E(A.) I 47t
E(A.) from Eq. (9-2)

UseosFsFa
Fx snXF

Fys7t YF

MTFo(F) • MTFc(F)

Design parameter

d= 30 I1ffi

Typical for available
detectors

Specify quality factor
for imaging, Q

Design parameter

Q=1.1

0.5 < Q< 2 (0=1.1 for
good Image quality)

Specify operating
wavelength, A.

Design parameter

A. = 4.2 I1ffi

Based on subject trades

Look up transmJssJvlty, See Ag. 9-6
T (..t) of the atmosphere

h·d
f=X

f=0.7m

Use altitude and
Eq. (9-12)

Compute upwelling
radiance, Lup/

2.44l·f·Q
D=
d

D=O.263m

Eq. (9-14) equivalent

Compute integrated
upweUing radIance,l.mt, l.mt(..t) = ~Lupt(A., - A.t+1)

And d'dfraction-Dmlted
aperture diameter, D

Comments

Step 5. DefIne Sensor OptIcs

Specify width for
square detectors, d

Define focal length, f

289

Lup/ (A.)= LA T (A.)

,

Use range A. ± AA 12

See Ag. 9-6

Evaluate operating
bandwidth

Total Input radiance as
a funcUon of wavelength
Evaluate over operating
Lint =
0.433 W/rrI2lsr bandwidth

290

Space Payload Design and Sizing

9.5

TABLE 9-15. C8lculaUon DesIgn Parameters for a PassIve OpUcal Sensor. (Continued)
Step

Calculation

FIreSat

Comments

9.6

Examples

291

9.5.6 Assess Life-cycle Cost and Operability of the Payload and Mission

Compute no. of
Ne=Np ' QE
electrons available, Ne

Ne = 8.3 x 1()3 Evaluate for an Ideal
detector

Determine no. of
noise electrons, Nn

Nn=,,{ii;

Nn =91

Considers only
Shott noise

Define no. of read-out
noise electrons, Nr

DesIgn parameter

Nr =25

TypIcal value

Determine total no. of
noise electrons, Nt

Nt=~N:+N:

Nt =95

Assumes uncorrelated
noise processes

In addition to trades between minimal and desired performance, spacecraft designs
are heavily driven by cost. Several approaches have been proposed and implemented
to treat cost as an independent variable. For our purposes, it is sufficient to note that
trading cost and performance means it is no longer sufficient to state the mission
requirements clearly and realistically. Rather, the mission requirements become
involved in the iterative process of design (see Fleeter [1996]). There are several
excellent descriptions of how to include cost as a system parameter rather than a given;
see for example Shishko and Jorgensen [1996].
Working through the trade-offs associated with cost, performance, and requirements in this early stage of payload definition keeps payload designers focused on the
best sensor characteristics to maximize mission performance and minimize cost.
Designers sometimes have a tendency to want to perform a purely analytical evaluation of the costs and benefits of various design options. Unfortunately, the relative
benefits of different design features are difficult if not impossible to quantify in an
unambiguous and universally accepted manner. Analysis can be very useful for
providing a common footing and level playing field for the different design attributes.
illtimately, however, judgments about satisfying mission objectives within cost and
schedule constraints rely on human insight, adding to the difficulty and importance of
this portion of the payload definition process.
Once we determine the final payload type and basic payload performance
requirements, then payload final design can commence. The final payload design
could be as simple as an evaluation of existing payloads that are available, or it could
involve detailed design, fabrication, and testing of an entirely new instrument. The
final step in the payload definition and sizing process is the decision to procure or fabricate the spacecraft payload.
Integrating a payload into a spacecraft design introduces several practical considerations for the other payload subsystems. These derived requirement can have a
significant impact on the rest of the spacecraft. Table 9-16 contains an overview of
some of the accommodation aspects of a payload as it impacts the other spacecraft
subsystems. Resolving the impact of these requirements means we must assess the
performance, cost, and technical risk of each subsystem to accommodate the payload.

And slgnaI-to-nolse
SNR=Ne/N,
ratio of the bnage, SNR

SNR=88

Assuming signal
dominates background

9.6 Examples

Determine sensor
dynamic range, DR

DR=332.9

WIth respect to
cold space

Step 6. EstImate Sensor RadIometry (for Nadir VIewIng) (ConUnued)
Compute radiated
power, L, from a
ground pixel at nadIr
Compute Input power,
Pin> at sensor

L=L./nt·X,Y

Pm=

~{%r·n

L = 389.5 W/sr Total power from the
ground scene that
arrives at the Instrument

1\,=
I\, Is power at the
4.3 x 10-11 W entrance to the optics

Define optical
transmission factor 'to

DesIgn parameter

'to = 0.75

And Input power, Po ,

Po=Pm·'to

I'oc
Very litUe power arrives
3.2 x 10-11 W at each pixel

at the detector pixel

TypIcal value for optical
systems

Determine available
energy, E, after
integration time

E=Po'

And no. of avaDable
photons, Np

N,;=EMhc

Np= 1.7x 1()4 h Is Planck's constant,
c Is speed of light

Define quantum
efficIency, QE, of
detector at A

DesIgn parameter

QE=O.5

r,

DR=N"INr

E=
RadIometric design
7.8 x 10-16 Ws challenge for RreSat

Typical physIcal
properly of detector
material

Step 7. FInd the Noise-Equivalent Temperatw:e Difference
Recompute all the
parameters In Step 6
for4T=1 K
Determine no. of
charge c8rrters for
1 K temp. change

Compute noiseequivalent temp.
difference, NeT

TII9W=T+1K

4N = Ne,.. - Ne
NeT=Ne/4N

Ne =8.7 x 1()3 Assume scene
temperature changes
by1degK
4N=335.8

NeT=0.3K Temperature limit the
Instrument can resolve

We present two examples of remote sensing payload designs-one very preliminary and one very mature-to give an indication of the beginning and ending points
of the design process. Sec. 9.6.1 provides an initial assessment of a payload to fulfill
the FrreSat mission. Sec. 9.6.2 describes features of the MODerate-Resolution
Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS), one of the primary sensors on board the Earth
Observing System EOS-AMI spacecraft, which has a fire detection capability.
9.6.1 The FireSat Payload

To illustrate the preliminary design process for payloads, we will estimate the basic
parameters for the FrreSat payload developed throughout Chaps. 1-8 and earlier in
Chap. 9. We cannot expect to carry out a detailed design without substantial input from
an IR payload designer. Still, we would at least like to know whether the FireSat
payload is the size of a shoebox or the size of a truck.

1,
292

Space Payload Design and Sizing

TABLE 9-16. Impact of Remote Sensing Payloads on the Spacecraft Design. The table
summerizes requirements in other elements of the spacecraft design that must be
present to support a remote sensing payload.
Impact Area

Structure

Typical Requirements to
Support Payload
Mount the optical Instruments

isostatically to the spacecraft bus
Do not apply excessive forces or
torques to the payload instrument

Make the mounting structure or base
plate for optical components stiff
enough to prevent any misalignment
when subjected to the forces and
vibrations of launch

Thermal

External
Alignment

Pointing

Assembly
Integration and
Verification

AddlUonal
Considerations
Carefully analyze aging of material
(e.g., stress release in metal parts),
humidity release, transition to microgravity, and acceleration forces
Typical stability requirements at
critical locations within the optical
instrument housing are in the JlITI and
mdeg range

p =sin-I (RE/(RE + h» =64.3 deg

From Eq. (5-15)

(9-24)

A key parameter in the system design is the minimum elevation angle, E, at which
the system can work. We do not have an estimate of that yet. but we do know that IR
payloads do not work well at small elevation angles. Therefore, we will tentatively
assume a minimum elevation angle of 20 deg, recognizing that this may be a very critical trade at a later stage. With tltis assumption, we can compute the nadir angle range,
11, the maximum ground-track angle or swath width, A., and the maximum range to the
target. D, from the formulas in Sec. 5.2:

11 = 57.9 deg

it= 90-11- E= 12.1 deg
D = RE (sin it I sin 11) = 1,580 km

From Eq. (5-25a)

(9-25)

From Eq. (5-26)

(9-26)

From Eq. (5-27)

(9-27)

These equations imply that the sensor on board the spacecraft will have to swing
back and forth through an angle of ±57.9 deg to cover the swath. The swath width on
the ground will be 2 x 12.1 24.2 deg wide in Earth-central angle, with a maximum
distance to the far edge of the swath of 1,580 km. Had we been able to work all the
way to the true horizon (E = 0), the maximum Earth central angle would be 90 - P =
27.5 deg, and the swath width would be 55 deg. Increasing the minimum elevation
angle to 20 deg has very dramatically reduced the size of the available swath.
We next find the orbit period, P, and longitude shift per orbit. M., (Sec. 7.2):

=

Use reference cubes to achieve
alignment

P =1.659 x 1()-4 x (6,378 + hf312 =98.8 min From Eq. (7-7)

(9-28)

Extemal alignment requires a
calibrated optical bench.

M. =1.65 x (360/24) =24.8 deg

(9-29)

For monocular optical Instruments,
make the pointing requirements on
the order of 0.1 to 0.01 of the swath
width, typically

Mount attitude determination sensors
(e.g., star sensors) to the instrument
(not the bus) to minimize the effects
of thermoelasticlty

For stereoscopic Instruments,
automated digital terrain mapping
requires pointing knowledge of 1/5
ofa pixel

Do pointing by maneuvering the
spacecraft or by pointing devices
(such as pointing mirrors for the front
of the Instrument or gimbals for the
entire instrument)

Optical Instruments require clean
rooms and clean laminar air flow
benches for all integration and
verification activities
Clean room requirements typically
range from 100 to 100,000 ppm
System
Sensor must have an unobstructed
Accommodation fleld-of-vlew
Sensor must have a guard cona to
prevent performance degradation due
to stray light
Avoid pointing toward the Sun

The FrreSat altitude trade led to a preliminary altitude, h =700 kIn. From this, we
can determine the angular radius of the Earth, p:

sin 11 = cos E sin P

Make large opto-mechanical
Large reflective systems (which use
assemblies temperature stabilized or Zerodur, Aluminum, or Beryllium or
isothermal
newly developed materials such as
SiC or CsiC as materials for the
Operate refractive optical systems
typically within a specific temperature mirrors) and mounting structures
(which use composite materials) are
range to achieve required
performance (frequently they employ temperature sensitive and may
require semi-active temperature
semi-active temperature control)
control of structure and/or mirrors
Make reflective systems entirely from
Temperature gradients In optical
the sarne material which leads to a
components can severely degrade
compensation of thermal effects
performance
(typically done for cryogenic optical
systems)
Align the optical axis of the instrument
and/or the line of sight of the pointing
device with an extemal reference on
the spacecraft. Extemal alignments
may need to be on the order of
1 arc sec

Examples

9.6

Cleaning optical surfaces Is generally
not possible
During exposure to the environment,
use cleanliness samples to verify the
level of contamination
Orient radiators and passive coolers
for infrared systems to prevent
interference with optical devices
Calibration devices Impose
geometric constraints with respect to
the optics of the system and the orbit

FromEq. (5-17)

Therefore, at the equator, successive node crossings are 24.8 deg apart. Notice that
this is slightly larger but very close to the 24.2 deg swath width which we computed
above. This is an important characteristic for FrreSat. It would be extremely valuable
to have the swaths overlap so that every FrreSat spacecraft can cover all locations on
the Earth twice per day. Therefore, in designing the payload, we should work hard to
maintain either the altitude or the minimum elevation angle to provide some swath
overlap. Doing so could dramatically reduce the number of spacecraft required and
therefore the cost of the system.
As Fig. 9-24 shows, the swath width does not need to be quite as large as the
spacing between nodes along the equator. Even at the equator, it is enough to have a
swath width equal to S, the perpendicular separation between the ground tracks. In
Chap. 7, we selected an inclination for FtreSat of 55 deg to cover up to 65 deg latitude.
Consequently, we can use the spherical triangle ABC shown in the figure to compute
S as follows:
S =sin-I (sin 24.8 deg sin 55 deg) =20.1 deg

(9-30)

The perpendicular separation between the orbits at the equator is 20.1 deg. Because
the swath width is 24.2 deg, we now have some overlap margin even at the equator and
substantial margin at higher latitudes, which are the primary areas of interest. We
could, therefore, increase the minimum elevation angle to 25 deg. This. would be a

294

Space Payload Design and Sizing

T
Examples

9.6

reasonable option. At present, we instead choose to hold E at 20 deg and to provide
some margin on altitude and elevation angle for later payload trades.

certain what our mapping requirement is, we are reasonably sure that it is smaller than
6 kIn. We need to locate fires more accurately than this. Note also that the accuracy
has been set almost entirely by our crude attitude number of 0.1 deg.
The next most critical parameter is the I-Ian error in target altitude. This means that
we assume we can determine the altitude of the fire above the Earth to 1 km-a reasonable accuracy with an oblate Earth model. But significantly improving this accmacy would require carrying a map of the altitudes of all of the regions of interest. That
could be very difficult, particularly in mountainous areas, and would cost a lot more
money. Therefore, it is of little value to drive the error in nadir angle down below approximately 0.05 deg because it would no longer be the dominant error source. Fig. 925B shows the curves that we would achieve with the error in nadir angle reduced to
0.05 deg and all of the other error sources remaining the same. Now the contribution
of the errors in nadir angle and target altitude are comparable, so we will use this budget to establish a preliminary mapping requirement of 5.5 km at a 20-deg elevation angle, and 3.5 Ian at a 30-deg elevation angle. This may stiII be considerably more crude
than we would like, so we may need to revisit this issue.

,km _ _ EnGr

Rg.9-24.

Computation of RreSat Ground-Track Parameters.

We next compute the required resolution and data rates for FrreSat. From Table
1-5, we initially estimated the needed ground resolution as 30 m. Because this is meant
to be a very low cost system, we will assume that the required resolution, B,., is at nadir
so that from an altitude of 700 km we have:

SpIcoad-_. . .-

102030406060708090

Br = 0.030nOO

= 4.3 x

10-5 rad

= 0.00245 deg

(9-31)

A. 0.1 deg NadIr Angle Error

Had we made this requirement at the maximum slant range of 1,580 km, the required
resolution would have been 0.001 deg.
Using this resolution, we can follow the procedure outlined in Table 9-15 to compute the data rate for FrreSat as 85 Mbps. This data rate from the FrreSat sensor is very
high. However, we will be able to reduce it in many ways. We could process the data
on board or, more simply, tum off the payload over the oceans or other areas where
fire detection is of marginal utility. For now, we will leave the value as computed so
that we reniain aware of the data rate out the sensor, recognizing that this will be need
to be reduced later in the system design.
We next compute mapping and pointing budgets for FireSat. We do not have a finn
mapping requirement, but we do have some broad sense of what is needed. We begin,
therefore, with a rough estimate of performance parameters and create the mapping
error as a function of the elevation angle shown in Fig. 9-25A. In this figure, we have
used a O.I-deg nadir angle and azimuth errors corresponding to a relatively inexpensive pointing system based on an Earth Sensor. We know we can go to a more expensive system if necessary. In looking at Fig. 9-25A, we see that the mapping error at our
chosen minimum elevation angle of 20 deg is between 6 and 8 Ian. While we are not

Rg. 9-25.

0

10

--_. .

2031140106070

ID&O

_(dog)

B. 0.05 deg Nadir Angle Error

RreSat Mapping Budget. Reducing the nadir angle error below 0.05 deg wID have
relatively IlWe impact on the overall mapping error because of the 1 kin target altitude
error. Compare with Rg. 5-22.

Equipped with the analysis of the mission geometry, we tum our attention to the
process described in Table 9-15, these computations allow us to evaluate the optical.
signal processing, and radiometric performance of the instrument. The third column in
that table summarizes the results of the computations for a whiskbroom sensor design
for the FrreSat mission.
The example FireSat design addresses only initial feasibility of the instrument.
Several challenges ~main with this design and addition iterations need to be made in
the context of mission requirements and constraints. The computed data rate of
85 Mbps will present a design challenge, as will the multiple pixel scanner needed to
scan 256 pixels simultaneously. This will require all 256 pixels to be read out in parallel, and the signal processing will need to be designed accordingly. These features
present a particularly demanding element of the initial design.

296

1

Space Payload Design and Sizing

9.6

I~.F.

---MTFo
-MTF.

,~

to.

1

11\

8

I\

i~

I

4

I

E 0.2

l.

\

I

0

D8!Bdor

I.I""!"I-

t--

--MTF.

\i,\

"

~

~

o

'" , ,

.\

1.(\

~ j
o

0.01

f--

-MTF.

"

0.02

,
"

"

F_

"

......

- - r",

"

tx: I -

0.03 0.04 0.05 0.0& 0.07 0.08

A

0.4

TABLE 9-17. Summary of AreSat Initial Parameter EstImates.
Nominal Value

Altitude, h
'ncDnation, I

1]

111

.1

IIJ'" y'

\.,.

I

~

~\I.t. I

1

0.2

0

As described in Sec. 9.5.3, we have incorporated a factor of 2 to provide margin for
having substantially scaled down the payload size. The estimate of the linear dimensions needs to be adjusted as well to allow for the size of the scanner which will need
to be mounted in front of the sensor optics and electronics. A rough estimate of the
scanner dimensions is the same siz(l as the payload estimate. Thus, as summarized in
Table 9-17, the budgeted dimensions for the optics plus scanner is 0.8 m long x 0.3 m
diameter. Thus, our first guess is that the FireSat payload is a moderately sized instrument and could fit well on a small to medium-sized spacecraft.

Parameter

B

1

f:

Examples

9.6

]I
3.4

3.8

3.8

4

4.2

4.4

4.6

'1111/1/1

l'IIV511
4.8

5.2

fl~~lllllI
3.4 3.8

3.8. 4 4.2 4.4 4.8
WsveIength (pm)

4.8

5

5.2

Swath width, 2A.max
Nadir angle range,

sample Instrument C Illustrates optical transmission of the atmosphere over the
operating wavelength of the sensor. 0 shows the total upwelling radiance through the
atmosphere across the operating bandwidth of the sensor.

A second challenge with the design is the relatively poor signal-to-noise ratio of
88. If we consider a pixel at the limit of the field of view, then radiometric information
becomes indistinguishable from noise. From this point of view our current design is at
the limit of feasibility and may require changes to meet the SNR requirements. Finally
the F-number of the optics of 2.7 (driven by the focal length of 0.7 m and an aperture
diameter of 26 em) is quite a demanding optical design.
. We now select a "similar instrument" from Table 9-13 for our FIreSat example.
We appear to have two options: the Thematic Mapper or the Multispectral Mid-JR
instrument We tentatively select the Multispectral Mid-JR as our similar instrument
and will scale from its fundamental parameters of 1.5 m x 1 m diameter, 800-kg
weight, and 900 W po~er, for its I-m aperture. We first compute the aperture ratio,

R =0.2611.0 =0.26

From (Eq. 9-16)

(9-32)

With this fundamental ratio. we now estimate the FrreSat payload parameters as
Size =0.4 m x 0.3 m diameter
Weight =2 x 800 x 0.263 =28 kg
Power =2 x 900 x 0.263 =32 W

:t57.9 deg
Needs payload Input

Instrument

mid·range IR scanner

Eavloag Oeeds egtl !omtt

Ground resolution

Power, P

30 m at nadir
4.3 x 10-5 rad
0.26m
0.4 m x 0.3 m dia
28 kg
32W

Data rate, DR

85 Mbltslsec

Mapping

3.5 km @ E= 30°
5.5 km @ E= 20°

Size

Ag.9-26. Sample Characteristics for Sample AreSat Sensor Described In Table 9-15 In
Sec. 9.5.5. A shows the point spread function of the sensor with respect to the pixel
size (shown as a horizontal bar). B shows 'the modulation transfer functions of the

Coverage to 65 deg latitude
20.1 deg required

Min. elevation angle, E

Aperture, A
D

Comments
Range = 600 to 800 km

20deg

Instrument resolution

WowIengIb (pm)

C

11

700km
55deg
24.2deg

Weight, W

Key parameter-needs trade study

= 0.00245 deg

May be limiting feature

Our preliminary analysis of a small, lightweight FireSat payload shows that the
mission is feasible but challenging. Several refinements and iterations on' the design
have the potential to result in a viable and cost-effective payload concept To illustrate
the end point of such a process, we tum our attention to MODIS, a large instrument
and a mature design with a fire detection mission.

.
9.6.2 MODIS--A Real FireSat Example
A detailed design for a spacecraft sensor that can automatically detect fires already
exists. The MODIS instrument (MODerate-resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer) on
the Terra spacecraft has been designed for a comprehensive range of scientific investigations into Earth's atmosphere, oceans, and land use-much more challenging than
fundamental requirements for the FtreSat mission (therefore, MODIS may be overdesigned for the FrreSat mission). However, the MODIS instrument represents a
mature design and a sophisticated, space-based fire detection system. The features and
considerations that drove the MODIS fire detection sensor and data processing
algorithms offer an opportunity to inform our broader discussion ofFtreSat throughout
this book.

Space Payload Design and Sizing

298

9.6

The developmen~ of the MODIS sensor for Terra traces its roots to the GOES and
NOAA spacecraft, and it represents at least a decade of research and design to improve
the performance of the Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR) flown
on the NOAA series of spacecraft. The MODIS sensor on Terra is a whiskbroom, electro-optical system. Table 9-18 lists its technical characteristics and specifications. The
MODIS instrument includes specific design features to capitalize on the physics of
thermal detection of fires. MODIS fire products include detecting the incidence of fire,
its location, emitted energy, its ratio of flaring to smoldering, and the area.burned (bum
scar detection). These products are important for understanding the influence of buming biomass on many atmospheric processes as well as direct and indirect effects on
terrestrial ecosystems [Kaufman and Justice, 1996]. The key innovations for the fue
detection algorithms include distinguishing the flaring and smoldering parts of the fire
and the automatic algorithms for reporting the progress of fires.
TABLE 9-18. MODIS Instrument CharacterJsUcs. [Herring, 1997.]

Orbit

705 km, 10:30 am. descending node, Sun synchronous

Scan Rate

20.3 rpm cross track

Swath Dimensions

2,330 km (across track) by 10 km (along track)

Telescope
Size

17.78 em dlam off-axis, afocaJ (collimated, with Intermediate field stop)
1.0x 1.6 x 1.0 m

Mass
Power

274 kg

162.5 W (avg for one orbit), 168.5 W (peak)

DeslgnUfe

6 years

Quantization
Data Rate

12 bits
6.2 Mbps (avg), 10.8 Mbps (day), 2.5 Mbps (night)

Spectral Range

0.4-14.411f1l

Spectral Coverage
Spatial Resolution
Duty Cycle

250 m (2 bands), 500 m (5 bands), 1,000 m (29 bands) at nadir

±55deg, 2,330 km swath (contiguous scans at nadir at equator)

100%

The algorithm developed for MODIS fire detection data products employs two of
the 500 m resolution bands, one at 4 JLIIl and the other at 11 J1IIl. The algorithm is an
extension of the methods developed using AVHRR. A summary of the steps in the fire
processing algorithm follows [Kaufman and Justice, 1996]. (See also Sec. 163.)
InitiaIization. The algorithm eliminates pixels with potential problems due to
clouds or extreme viewing angles. It corrects apparent temperature readings for atmospheric absorption (including water vapor), and estimates the background temperature
for pixels containing fire.
Fire detection. The algorithm defines fue pixels based on thresholds and temperature differences between readings in the two spectral bands.
Correction. It eliminates potential false positive readings due to sun glint and consolidates fire readings from adjacent pixels to eliminate redundant reports.
Total emitted en~rgy. It estimates the total energy based on measurements in the
4 !lm channel.
Smoldering or flaming stage. It estimates the nature of the fire, namely, smoldering, flaming, or a combination of both.

References

The MODIS payload illustrates. many of the design features of an automated fire
detection system. In the context of the FrreSat mission, this example provides a poiIlt
design that has finalized a series of trade-offs in size, weight, power, resolution, and
data rate.

References
Bames, William L., Thomas S. Pagano, and Vincent V. Salomonson. 1998. "Prelaunch Characteristics of the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer
(MODIS) on EOS-AMI." IEEE Transactions in Geoscience and Remote Sensing,
vol. 36(4): 1088-1100, July.
Buiten, Henk J. and Jan G.P.W. C1evers, eds. 1996. Land Observation by Remote
Sensing: Theory and Applications. The Netherlands: Gordon and Breach Science
Publishers.
Cantafio, LeopoldJ., ed. 1989. Space-Based Radar Handbook. Boston, MA: Artech
House.
Chen, H.S. 1985. Space Remote Sensing Systems, an Introduction. Orlando, FL:
Academic Press.
Colwell, Robert N., ed. 1983. The Manual oj Remote Sensing. Falls Church, VA:
American Society and Photogrammetry and Sheridan Press.
Cruise, A.M., J.A. Bowles, TJ. Patrick and C.V. Goodall. 1998. Principles o/Space
Instrument Design. United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.
The CSTS Alliance (Boeing, General Dynamics, Lockheed, Martin Marietta, McDonnell Douglas, Rockwell). 1994. ''The Commercial Space Transportation Study:~
Report No. SS094OOO34, April.
Davies, John K. 1997. Astronomy From Space: The Design and Operation o/Orbiting
Observation. Chichester, England: John Wiley & Sons.
DeBlois, Bruce M. 1997. "Space Sanctuary: A Viable National Strategy." School of
Advanced Aerospace Studies Manuscript, Montgomery, AL.
Elachi, Charles. 1987. Introduction to the Physics and Techniques o/Remote Sensing.
New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Fleeter, Rick. 1996. "Reducing Spacecraft Cost" Chap. 5 in Reducing Space Missiore.
Cost, James R. Wertz and Wiley 1. LarsOJi, eds. Torrance, CA: Microcosm Press.
Glaser, P.E., F.P. Davidson. and Kl. Csigi. 1993. Solar Power SateUites. New York:
Ellis Horwood, Lut
Hall, R. Cargill. 1995. "The Eisenhower Administration and the Cold War: Framing
American Astronautics to Serve National Security." Prologue QULlrteriy o/the National Archives, Vol. 27(1): 59-72. Spring.
Herring, David. 1997. NASA's Earth Observing System: EOS AM·I. NASA Goddard
Space Flight Center.
Hovanessian, S.A. 1988. Introduction to Sensor Systems. Boston: Artech House.

300

Space Payload Design and Sizing

Huffman, Robert E. 1992. Atmospheric Ultraviolet Remote Sensing. Boston, MA:
Academic Press, Inc.
.
Kaufman, Yoram and Chris Justice. 1996. "MODIS FIre Products." Algorithm
Technical Background Document, ATBD-MODIS-14, Ver. 2.1, Earth Observing
System Document ID #2741, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, December 3.
Kidder, S.Q. and T.H. Vonder Haar. 1995. Satellite Meteorology: An Introduction.
San Diego: Academic Press.
King, Michael D., Yoram I. Kaufman, W. Paul Menzel, and Didier Tame. 1992.
''Remote Sensing of Cloud, Aerosol, and Water Vapor Properties from the Moderate Resolution Imaging Radiometer (MODIS)." IEEE Transactions on Geoscience
and Remote Sensing, Vol. 30(1): 2-27, January.
Kondo, Y., ed. 1990. Observatories in Earth Orbit and Beyond. Boston: KIuwer
Academic Publishers.
Kramer, Herbert J. 19%. Observation of the Earth and Its Environment: Survey of
Missions and Sensors (Third Edition). Berlin: Springer.
Lutz, Reinhold. 1998. "Design Considerations for High Resolution Earth Observation
Instruments." Course notes from Technical University, Delft, Toptech Studies
Program.
McCluney, Ross. 1994. Introduction to Radiometry and Photometry. Boston: Artech
House.
.

Chapter 10
Spacecraft Design and Sizing·
Emery I. Reeves, United States Air Force Academy
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4

Requirements, Constraints, and the Design Process
Spacecraft Configuration

Design Budgets
Designing the Spacecraft Bus

Propulsion Subsystem; Attitude DetermiTUJtion and
Control Subsystem; COTfl1ll1mications Subsystem;
Command and Data Handling Subsystem; Thermal
Subsystem; Power Subsystem; Structures and
Mechanisms
10.5 Integrating the Spacecraft Design
Spacecraft Size; Lifetime and Reliability
10.6 Examples

Shishko, Robert and Edward J. Jorgensen. 1996. "Design-to-Cost for Space Missions," Chap. 7 in Reducing Space Mission Cost. James R. Wertz and Wiley 1.
Larson, eds. Torrance, CA: Microcosm Press and Dordrecht, The Netherlands:
KIuwer Academic Publishers.

Over the past four decades the engineering design of spacecraft has evolved from
infancy to well-defined techniques supported by analysis tools, manufacturing
technology, and space-quaIified hardware. This chapter summarizes these techniques,
with emphasis on the conceptual design of the spacecraft vehicle. The following two
chapters present more detailed design and manufacturing information. To design a
spacecraft, we must understand the mission, including the payload's size and characteristics, plus significant system constraints such as orbit, lifetime, and operations. We
then configure a space vehicle to carry the payload equipment and provide the
functions necessary for mission success. The design process shown in Table 10-1
involves identifying these functions, choosing candidate approaches for each function.
and selecting the best approaches. This chapter presents design methods with rules of
thumb that will help us roughly estimate the spacecraft design [Agrawal, 1986; Chetty,
1991; Griffin and French, 1991].
An unmanned spacecraft consists of at least three elements: a payload, a spacecraft
bus, and a booster adapter. The payload is the mission-peculiar equipment or instruments. The spacecraft bus carries the payload and provides housekeeping functions.
The payload and spacecraft bus may be separate modules, or the vehicle may be an
integrated design. The booster adapter provides the load-carrying interface with the
boost vehicle~ The spacecraft may also have a propellant load and a propulsion kick
stage. The propellant, either compressed gas, liquid or solid fuel, is used for velocity
corrections and attitude control. A kick stage,· if used, is a separate rocket motor or
liquid stage used to inject the spacecraft into its mission orbit.

Shott, John Robert. 1997. Remote Sensing: The Image Chain Approach. New York:
Oxford University Press.

• Also called apogee boost motor, propulsion module, or integral propulsion stage.

McDougall, Walter A. 1997. The Heavens and the Earth: A Political History of the
Space Age. New York: Basic Books.
Meneghini, Robert and Toshiaki Kozu. 1990. Spaceborne Weather Radar. Boston,
MA: Artech House.
Miller, Lester John and Edward Friedman. 19%. Photonics Rules of Thumb. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Morgan, W. L., and GD. Gordon 1989. Communications Satellite Handbook. New
York: John Wiley and Sons.
Schnapf, Abraham, ed. 1985. Monitoring Earth's Ocean, Land, and Atmosphere from
Space-Sensors, Systems, and Applications. New York: American Institute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.
Seyrafi, Khalil. 1985. Electro-Optical Systems Analysis. Los Angeles: Electro Optical
Research Company.

Slater, Philip N. 1980. Remote Sensing: Optics and Optical Systems. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley Publishing.
301

302

r

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

TABLE 10-1. OvervIew of Spacecraft Design and Sizing. The process is highly iterative,
normally requIring several cycles through the table even for prefimlnary desIgns.

Step

References

1. Prepare fist of desIgn requirements and constraints

Sec. 10.1

2. Select prefiinlnary spacecraft design approach and overall configuration
based on the above Ost

Sec. 10.2

3. Establish budgets for spacecraft propellant. power, and weight

Sec. 10.3

4. Develop preDmlnary subsystem designs

Sec. 10.4

5. Develop baseOne spacecraft configuration

Sees. 10.4,10.5

6. Iterate, negotiate, and update requirements, constraints, design budgets

Steps 1 to5

The top-level requirements and constraints are dictated by the mission concept,
mission architecture, and by payload operation. For instanCe, the selection of orbit is
intimately tied to the selected mission and payload as described in Chaps. 6 and 7.
From a spacecraft design standpoint, the orbit also affects attitude control, thermal
design, and the electric power subsystem. However, most of these design effects are
secondary to the effect that the orbit can have on payload performance. The designer
therefore selects the orbit based on mission and payload performance, and computes
the required spacecraft performance characteristics such as pointing, thermal control,
power quantity, and duty cycle. The spacecraft is then sized to meet these requirements. We can summarize succinctly the spacecraft bus functions: support the payload
mass; point the payload correctly; keep the payload at the right temperature; provide
electric power, commands, and telemetry; put the payload in the right orbit and keep
it there; and provide data storage and communications, if required. The spacecraft bus
consists of subsystems or equipment groups which provide these functions. Table 10-2
lists the somewhat arbitrary definitions of subsystems used here and in Chap. 11. The
table also includes alternate terminology and groupings you may encounter, along
with references to more detailed information. Sometimes the payload is also treated as
a subsystem. Chapters 9 and 13 discuss payload design.
The propulsion subsysiem provides thrust for changing the spacecraft's translational velocity or applying torques to change its angular momentum. The simplest
spacecraft do not require thrust and hence have no propulsion equipment. But most
spacecraft need some controlled thrust, so their design includes some form of metered
propulsion--a propulsion system that can be turned on and off in small increments.
We use thrusting to change orbital parameters, correct velocity errors, maneuver,
counter disturbance forces (e.g., drag), control attitude during thrusting, and control
and correct angular momentum. The equipment in the propulsion subsystem includes
a propellant supply (propellant, tankage, distribution system, pressurant, and propellant controls) and thrusters or engines. Compressed gasses, such as nitrogen, and
liquids, such as monopropellant hydrazine, are common propellants. Significant sizing
parameters for the subsystem are the total impulse" and the number, orientation, and
thrust levels of the thrusters. Chapter 17 describes design and equipment for propulsion subsystems.
The attitude determination and control subsystem measures and controls the
spacecraft's angular orientation (pointing direction), or, in the case of a guidance,
navigation, and control system, both its orientation and linear velocity (which affects
its orbit). The simplest spacecraft are either uncontrolled or achieve control by passive

303
TABLE 10-2. Spacecraft Subsystems. A spacecraft conslsls of functional groups of equipment
or subsystems.
subsystem

Principal Functions

Other Names

References

Sec. 10.4.1,

Provides thrust to adjust orbit and
attitude, and to manage angular
momentum

Reaction Control
System (RCS)

Attitude
Determination &
Control System
(ADCS)

Provides determination and control
of attitude and orbit position, plus
pointing of spacecraft and
appendages

Attitude Control System Sees.
(ACS), Guidance,
10.4.2, f1.1,
Navigation, & Control
11.7
(GN&C) System,
Control System

Communicetion
(Comm)

Communicates with ground & other Tracking, Telemetry,
& Command (TT&C)
spacecraft; spacecraft tracking

Propulsion

Command & Data Processes and distributes
HandHng (c&DH) commands; processes, stores,
and formats data

Chap. 17

Sees.
10.4.3, 11.2

Spacecraft Computer
System, Spacecraft
Processor

Sees.
10.4.4,11.3,
Chap. 16

ThennaJ

Maintains equipment within
allowed temperature ranges

Environmental
Control System

Sees.

Power

Generates, stores, regulates,
and distributes electric power

EJectrfc Power System
(EPS)

Sees.

Structures and
Mechanisms

Provides support structure, booster Structure Subsystem
adapter, and moving parts

10.4.5, 11.5
10.4.6,11.4

Sees.
10.4.7,11.6

methods such as spinning or interacting with the Earth's magnetic or gravity fields.
These mayor may not use sensors to measure the attitude or position. More complex
systems employ controllers to process the spacecraft attitude, and actuators, torquers.
or propulsion subsystem thrusters to change attitude, velocity, or angular momentum.
Spacecraft may have several bodies or appendages, such as solar arrays or communication antennas, that require individual attitude pointing. To control the appendages"
attitude, we use actuators, sometimes with separate sensors and controllers. The
capability of the attitude control subsystem depends on the number of body axes and
appendages to be controlled, control accuracy and speed of response, maneuvering
requirements, and the disturbance environment. Section 11.1 discusses design of the
attitude determination and control subsystem.
The communications subsystem links the spacecraft with the ground or other
spacecraft. Information flowing to the spacecraft (uplink or forward link) consists of
commands and ranging tones. Information flowing from the spacecraft (downlink or
return link) consists of status telemetry and ranging tones and may include payload
data. The basic communication subsystem consists of a receiver, a transmitter, and a
wide-angle (hemispheric or omnidirectional) antenna. Systems with high data rates
may also use a directional antenna. The communications subsystem receives and
demodulates commands, modulates and transmits telemetry and payload data, and
receives and retransmits range tones-modulation that allows signal turnaround time
delay and hence range to be measured. The subsystem may also provide coherence
between uplink and downlink signals, allowing us to measure range-rate Doppler
shifts. We size the communications subsystem by data rate, allowable error rate,
communication path "length, and RF frequency. Section 11.2 and Chap. 13 discuss
design of the communications SUbsystem.

304

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

lo.t

The command and doJa. handling subsystem distributes commands and accumulates, stores, and formats data from the spacecraft and payload. For simpler
systems, we combine these functions with the communications subsystem as a tracking, telemetry, and command subsystem. This arrangement assumes that distributing
commands and formatting telemetry are baseband extensions of communications
modulation and demodulation. In its more general form, the subsystem includes a
central processor (computer), data buses, remote interface units, and data storage units
to implement its functions. It may also handle sequenced or programmed events. For
the most part, data volume and data rate determine the subsystem's size. Section 11.3
discusses subsystem design, and Chap. 16 covers computers and software.
The power subsystem provides electric power for the equipment on the spacecraft
and payload. It consists of a power source (usually solar cells), power storage (batteries), and power conversion and distribution equipment. The power needed to operate
the equipment and the power duty cycle determine the subsystem's size, but we must
also consider power requirements during eclipses and peak power consumption.
Because solar cells and batteries have limited lives, our design must account for power
requirements at beginning-of-life (BOL) and end-of-life (EOL). Section 11.4 discusses
design of the power subsystem.
The thermal subsystem controls the spacecraft equipment's temperatures. It does so
by the physical arrangement of equipment and using thermal insulation and coatings to
balance heat from power dissipation, absorption from the Earth and Sun, and radiation
to space. Sometimes passive, thermal-balance techniques are not enough. In this case,
electrical heaters and high-capacity heat conductors, or heat pipes, actively control
equipment temperatures. The amount of heat dissipation and temperatures required for
equipment to operate and survive determine the subsystem's size. Section 11.5
discusses temperature control in more detail.
The structural subsystem carries, supports, and mechanically aligns the spacecraft
equipment. It also cages and protects folded components during boost and deploys
them in orbit. The main load-carrying structure, or primary structure, is sized by either
(1) the strength needed to carry the spacecraft mass through launch accelerations and
transient events during launch or (2) stiffness needed to avoid dynamic interaction
between the spacecraft and the launch vehicle structures. Secondary structure, which
consists of deployables and supports for components is designed for compact packaging and convenience of assembly. Section 11.6 discusses stn,lctural design.

Requirements, Constraints, and the Design Process

10.1

TABLE 10-3. Principal Requirements and Constraints for Spacecraft Design. These
parameters typlcaJly drive the design of a baseline system.
Requirements and
Constraints

Information Needed

In designing spacecraft, we begin by developing baseline requirements and
constraints such as those in Table 10-3. If some of the information is not available, we
may need to assume values or use typical values such as those presented here or in the
following chapters. For successful design, we must document all assumptions and
revisit them until we establish an acceptable baseline.
To get a feel for the size and complexity of a spacecraft design, we must understand
the space mission: its concept of operations, duration, overall architecture, and constraints on cost and schedule. Even if we select a mission concept arbitrarily from
several good candidates, clearly defining it allows us to complete the spacecraft design
and evaluate its performance.
The payload is the single most significant driver of spacecraft design. Its physical
parameters-size, weight, and power~ominate the physical parameters of the

Reference
Chaps. 1,2

MIssIon:

Operations Concept

Type, mission approach

Sec. 1.4

Spacecraft ute & ReHability

MIssion duration, success criteria

Sees. 1.4, 10.5, 19.2

Comm Architecture

Command, control, comm approach

Sec. 13.1

Security

Level, requirements

Sees. 13.1, 15.4

Programmatic Constraints

Cost and schedule profiles

Chaps. 1,20
Chaps. 9, 13

Payload:

Physical Parameters

Size, weight, shape, power

Sees. 9.5,

Operations

Duty cycle, data rates, fields of view

Sees. 9.5, 13.2

Pointing

Reference, accuracy, stability

Sees. 5.4, 9.3, 11.1

Slewing

liIagnHude,rrequency

13.4,13.5

Environment

Sees. 9.5,11.1
Max and min temperatures, cleanliness Sec. 9.5

Orbit:

Chaps. 6,7

Defining Parameters

A1t1tude,incnnation, eccentricity

Sees. 7.4, 7.5

Eclipses

Maximum duration, frequency

Ughting Conditions

Sun angle and viewing conditions

Sec. 5.1
Sees. 5.1, 5.2

Maneuvers

Size, frequency

Sees. 6.5, 7.3

Radiation Dosage

Average, peak

Sees. 8.1, 8.2

Environment:

Chap. 8

Particles & Meteoroids

Size, density

Sees. 8.1, 21.2

Space Debris

Density, probabirlty of impact

Sec. 21.2

Hostile EnvIronment

Type, level of threat

Sec. 8.2

Launch Strategy

Single, dual; dedicated, shared;
use of upper kick stage

SeeS. 18.1, 18.2

Launch:

10.1 Requirements, Constraints, and the Design Process

305

Chap. 18

Boosted Weight

Launch cepabiOties

Sees. 18.1, 18.2

Envelope

Size, shape

Sec. 18.3

Environments

g's, vibration, acoustics, temperature

Sec. 18.3

Interlaces

Electrical and mechanical

Sec. 18.3

Launch Sites

Locetions, allowed launch azimuths

Sec. 18.1

Ground-Syslem Interface:

Chaps. 14,15

Degree of Autonomy

Required autonomous operations

Ground St8tions

Number, locations. performance

Sees. 15.4,16.1
Sees. 15.1, 15.5

SpaceUnks

Space-to-space link, performance

Sees. 13.3, 13.4

306

spacecraft Design and Sizing

10.1

spacecraft. Payload operations and support are key requirements for the spacecraft's
subsystems, as well. The payload may also impose significant special requirements
that drive the design approach, such as cryogenic temperatures or avoidance of contamination. Fortunately, we often understand the payload's characteristics better than
the spacecraft's overall characteristics in the early design phases. Thus, we can infer
many important design features by understanding the payload and how it operates.
Chapters 6 and 7 show how orbital characteristics affect the mission. In spacecraft
design, the orbit affects propulsion, attitude control, thermal design. and the electric
power subsystem. Most of these design effects are secondary to the orbit's effect on
payload performance. Therefore, we select the orbit based on mission and payload performance. Then we compute the performance characteristics needed for the spacecraft.
such as pointing, thermal control, and power quantity and duty cycle. Fmally, we size
the spacecraft to meet these needs.
The natural space environment--especially radiation--limits two aspects of spacecraft design: usable materials or piece parts, and spacecraft lifetime. Radiation levels
and dose must be considered in the design, but they do not normally affect the system's
configuration or ability. Chapter 8 provides useful space environment information.
However, some types of hostile (weapon) environments may affect countermeasmes,
configuration, shielding, or maneuvering ability.
Selecting a boost vehicle and the possible use of kick stages are central issues in
designing a spacecraft. We must select a booster that can put at least the minimum
version of our spacecraft into its required orbit Chapter 18 describes available boosters, all of which have limited weight-lifting ability. In most cases, we must extrapolate
published data to meet our mission requirements. Chapters 6 and 7 present the laws of
orbital mechanics and the techniques of trajectory design. These include methods for
computing velocity increments and guidance techniques. In some cases, the spacecraft
must provide large amounts of velocity just to reach orbit or to guide the flight path.
Chapter 17 presents performance characteristics for solid and liquid propulsion kick
stages to implement these functions. Common nomenclature for a kick stage used to
inject a spacecraft into transfer orbit is a perigee kick motor (PKM), whereas a kick
stage used to circularize at high altitude is called an apogee kick motor (AKM).
The booster selection will also affect a spacecraft's linear dimensions. An aerodynamic cover, called a/airing, or shroud, protects the spacecraft as it travels through
the atmosphere. The fairing's diameter and length limit the spacecraft's size-at least
while it is attached to the booster. Chapter 18 presents the size of standard fairings for
various boosters. If the on-orbit spacecraft is larger than the fairing, it must be folded
or stowed to fit within the fairing and unfolded or deployed on orbit To design an item
with a large area but small intrinsic mass, such as a solar array or antenna, we make
the item as light as possible, fold it and protect it during boost, and deploy it (unfold,
pull, or stretch it into shape) on orbit Solar cells may rest on lightweight substrates or
even on film that is folded or rolled for storage. Antenna reflectors have consisted of
folded rigid panels or of fabric, either film or mesh. Thus, we meet the launch vehicle'S
demands for a smaller spacecraft by using a stowed configuration and then deploying
the spacecraft to meet the full size needed on orbit We use weight efficiently by
caging and protecting the light-weight deployables during boost
The ground system interface determines how much ground operators and the spacecraft can interact-an important part of design. The periods of visibility between
ground stations and the spacecraft limit ground control of spacecraft operations or
corrections of errant behavior. Visibility periods and ground coverage issues are

10.1

Requirements, Constraints, and the Design Process

307

described in Chap. 5. If ground operations cost too much, we may want the spacecraft
to operate autonomously-mtother major design decision.
Table 10-4 lists initial configuration decisions or trade-offs designers often face.
Weight, size, and power requirements for the payload place lower limits on
spacecraft's weight, size, and power. The spacecraft's overall size may depend on such
payload parameters as antenna size or optical system diameter. Our approach to spacecraft design must match these dimelll!ions and provide fields of view appropriate to the
payload functions. The spacecraft must generate enough power to satisfy the payload
needs as well as its own requirements. The amount of power and the duty cycle will
dictate the size and shape of solar arrays and the requirements for the battery.
TABLE 10-4. Initial Spacecraft Design DecIsions or Trade-offs. Further discussion of these
trades Is in Sec. 102.
Design
Approach or
Aspect

Where
Discussed

Principal Options
or Key Issues

Spacecraft
Weight

Table 10-10

Must allow for spacecraft bus weight and payload weight.

Spacecraft

Tables 10-8,
10-9

Must meet power requlraments of payload and bus.

POWBl'
Spacecraft Size

Sec. 10.1

Is there an item such as a payload antenna or optical
system that dom/nates the spacecraft's physical size? Can
the spacecraft be folded to fit within the booster diameter?
Spacecraft size can be esUmated from weight and power
requlremenls.

Attitude Control
Approach

Secs.102,
10.42,11.1

Options include no control, spin stabiDzatlon, or 3-axIs
control: selection of sensors and control torquers. Key
Issues are number of items to be controDed, accuracy, and
amount of scanning or slewing required.

SoIarAnay
Approach

Secs.102,
10.4.6,11.4

Options include planar, cylindrical. and omnidirectional
arrays either body mounted or offset

KIck Stage Use

Chaps. 17, 18

Use of a kick stage can raise Injected weight OptIons
Include solid and liquid stages.

Propulsion
Approach

Secs.102,
10.4.1,172,
17.3

Is metered propulsion required? Options Include no
propulsion, compressed gas, liquid monopropeDant or
blpropeOanl

Field-of-view and pointing considerations influence how we configure the spacecraft. Instruments, sensors, solar arrays, and thermal radiators all have pointing and
field-of-view requirements that must be satisfied by their mounting on the spacecraft
and the spacecraft's orientation. In the simplest case, all items are fixed to the body,
and control of the body's attitude points the field of view. In more complex cases,
single or two-degree-of-freedom mechanisms articulate the field of view.
We must also establish how to configure the spacecraft's propulsion early in the
design process. Although interaction with the Earth's gravity or magnetic field caJl
control attitude, it cannot change the spacecraft's velocity state. If spacecraft velocity
control is needed, some form of metered propulsion must be used. If we decide to Use
metered propulsion,we should look at using this system for such functions as attitude
control or as an orbit transfer stage. Most attitude-control systems use metered pro-

308

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

10.2

Spacecraft Configuration

10.2

pulsion to exert external torque on the spacecraft. Selecting a propulsion approach
. depends on the total impulse requirement, and the propulsion system's performance,
as discussed in Chap. 17.

A. Spin-stabllized Spacecraft
MIss/on: Nuclear Detection

VELA

Orbit: Super synchronous -107,000 km
Payload: Radiation h'lstruments body

10.2 Spacecraft Configuration

mounted
To estimate the size and structure of a spacecraft, we select a design approach,
develop a spacecraft configuration (overaIl arrangement) and make performance
allocations to the spacecraft subsystems. We then evaluate the resulting design and
reconfigure or reallocate as needed. Subsequent iterations add design detail and provide better allocations. The process of allocating design requirements involves two
mutually supporting techniques. Frrst, the allocated design requirements are dictated
by considering the overall spacecraft design-a top-down approach. Alternatively, the
allocated design requirements are developed by gathering detailed design information-a bottom-up approach. For instance, we may allocate 100 kg for structuraI
weight based on 10% of the overall spacecraft weight This is a top-down allocation.
However, a detailed design of the structure may require 120 kg if aluminum is used
and 90 kg if composites are used. These are bottom-up allocations, providing us with
the opportunity to trade off alternatives and reallocate requirements to optimize the
design. Most of the allocation methods presented in this chapter are top-down. They
provide a starting point for the allocation process. However, we should use them in
conjunction with bottom-up design from the more detailed information given in
Chaps. II, 16, and 17.
Figure 10-1 shows different spacecraft configurations. First, observe that each of
these spacecraft has a central body or equipment compartment that houses most of the
spacecraft equipment. Second. note that these spacecraft all have solar arrays either
mounted on external panels or on the skin of the equipment compartment. And finally
note that some of the spacecraft have appendages carrying instruments or antennas
attached to the main compartment. Let's examine each of these configuration features
in more detail.
Table 10-5 lists the factors called configuration drivers leading to the various
configurations. The weight, size and shape of the payload. and the boost vehicle diameter drive the size and sh~pe of the equipment compartment. Table 10-5 also presents
rules of thumb based on analysis of a large number of spacecraft designs. This analysis
shows that the average spacecraft bus dry weight (spacecraft weight excluding propellant) is approximately twice that of the payload. The minimum spacecraft bus dry
weight is equal to the payload weight and is achieved only when the payload is
massive and compact At the other extreme, low-density payloads or those consisting
of multiple instruments can lead to a spacecraft bus as massive as 6 times the payload.
Although this is a large range of possible spacecraft bus weights, these ratios are at
least a bound. Section 10.3 shows how to refine the estimate.
The spacecraft equipment compartment volume can be estimated from its weight.
For 75 spacecraft launched between 1975 and 1984, the average spacecraft in launch
configuration with propellant loaded and all appendages folded had a density of only
79 kglm3 with a maximum of 172 kglm3 and a minimum of 20 kglm3• However,
appendages are usually lightweight, so the weight of the equipment compartment is
only slightly less than the total spacecraft weight. We can use this experience to estimate the spacecraft size (volume and dimensions) by the steps shown in Table 10-6.
We start with payload weight to obtain an estimate of spacecraft bus weight (e.g.,

Configuration Features:

- Equipment compattment 1.6 m
dlapolyhedron; Internal solid AKM
- Solar array: Body mounted solar
panels
- Appendages: None
- Attitude control: Spln-stabDlzed,
lnertlally pointed
Power: 90 W
Weight: 221 kg

EXPLORER VI

Mission: Radiation Relds Measurement
Orbit 245 x 42,400 km

47 deg IncHnation
Payload: Radiation Instruments body

mounted
ConfIguration Features:

- Equipment CompBl1ment
0.6 m dla sphere
- Solar Anay: Four deployed paddles
2.2 mspan
- Appendages: Whip antennas
- Attitude control: Spin-stablllzed,
InertlaUy pointed
Weight: 64.6 kg
Mission: Communications
Orbit Geosynchronous

DSCS II

Payload: Communications transponder;
Earth coverage hom antennas, and
steerable pencil beam antennas
Configuration Features:

- Equipment Compartment
3 m dia cyDnder, 4.2 m long
- Solar Anay: Body mounted on cyDnder
- Appendages: Despun antenna platform
with steerable parabolic anteMas
- Attitude control: Spin-stabilized,
spin axis normal to orbit plane
Weight: 523 kg

Power: 535 W BOlo 360 W EOL
Rg.1o-1. Typical Spacecraft Showing Different Configuration OptIons. FOV
view; BOL beglnnlng-of-llfe; EOL end-of-llfe.

=

=

= field-of-

310

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

10.2

B. 3-Axls-Stablllzed Spacecraft

OSP

Mission: Earth Observation
Orbit: Geosynchronous
Payload: Body mounted telescope and
attitude sensors
Configuration Features:

To nadir

1
LANOSAT4,5

VelOCityv~

c.

Mission: Earth Observation
Orbit: 700 km, Sun synchronous
Payload: Multispectral scanner fixed to
spacecrsft body with Internal scanning mirror
ConfIguration Features:

MIss/on: Communications
Orbit: Geosynchronous
Payload: S, K, and C band communicetion
transponders with multiple antennas

311

Spacecraft Configurations Featuring Long Booms

GEOSAT

MIss/on: Mapping the Earth's shape
Payload: Radar altimeter
Configuration Features:
- Solar Anay: Eight panels, each 3 m
In length
- Appendages: 7 m boom with 50 kg tip
weight
- Attitude Control: Gravity-gradient long
axis vertical

- Equipment Compartment
4.5 m dIa cylinder
- Solar Anay: Body mounted on cylinder
and on deployed panels
- Appendages: Solar panels and
communications antennas
- Atl/tude Control: Cylinder axis pointed
toward nadir; Body rotates slowly about
cylinder axis to scan the payload FOV
Weight: 2,273 kg
Power: 1,274 W

- Equipment Compartment
Triangular cyDnder 2 m diB, 4 m long
- Solar Anay: Four panel deployed planar,
single axis pointing control
- Appendages: Communication antenna
:... Attitude Control: ~axIs control, 1 face
toward nadir, 1 axis in direction of flight
WI: 940 kg Power: 990 W BOlo 840 W EOL

TORS

Spacecraft Configuration

10.2

Weight: 636 kg

OGO

Mission: Observation of Geophysical
Phenomena
Payload: Multiple instruments for particle,
fields and radiation measurements
Configuration Features:

- Equipment Compartment
Rectangular 1 m x 1 m x 2 m
- Solar Anay: Planar panels with single
axis articulation
- Appendages: Boom-mounted
instruments, single-axis articulated
instrument package
- Attitude control: ~axis Earth-Sun control
using reaction wheels and cold gas
thrusters
Weight: 520 kg
Power: 560 W
Rg.1O-1_ Typical Spacecraft Showing Different Configuration OptIons. (Continued)
FOV = field-of-vlew; BOL = beginning-of-life; EOL = end-of-life.

ConfIguration Features:

- Equipment Compartment
2.5 m hexagonal cylinder. AuxiDary
compartments behind each of the
large steerable antennas
- Solar Anay: Deployed planar panels on
both sides of equipment compartment.
Single-axis articulation
- Appendages: Two 5 m steerable parabolic antennas, one 2 m steerable antenna, one 1.5 m fixed parabolic antenna
- Attitude Control: ~axls control, one face
toward nadir, 1-axis In Ifrrectlon of fflght
Weight: 2,200 kg Power: 1,700 W
Rg.1o-1_ Typical Spacecraft Showing DIfferent Configuration Options. (Continued)
FOV = fleld-of-vlew; BOL = beginnlng-of-life;. EOL = end-of-Iife.

twice payload weight) and add an estimate of propellant weight (see Sec. 10.3) to yield
spacecraft loaded weight. We now use an estimated density (e.g., 79 kglm3) to
compute the spacecraft volume. We select an equipment compartment shape and
dimensions to provide this volume, match the payload dimensions, and fit within the
booster diameter.
Usually, a spacecraft in folded launch configuration is cylindrically symmetric,
mounted on the booster with the axis of symmetry parallel to the thrust axis. The
folded spacecraft diameter is designed to fit within the boost vehicle diameter although
on rare occasions a bulbous fairing may be used to provide a slightly larger diameter.
(Bulbous fairings are generally avoided because they detract from booster performance.) Since the equipment compartment diameter is approximately the same as the
folded spacecraft diameter, we can use the boosre,- diameter as an upper limit for the
equipment comparbnent diameter and select a compartment shape to fit within this
diameter. Knowing its volume, we can readily compute the compartment's length.
Table 10-28 in Sec. 10.5 provides formulas for comparbnent parameters for a cubic

312

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

10.2

TABLE 10-5. Spacecraft Configuration DrIvers.

Configuration
Driver

Effect

Rule of Thumb

Reference

Payload Weight

Spacecraft dry
weight

Payload weight Is between 17"k and 50% Chap. 9
of spacecraft dry weight Average Is 30%

Payload Size
and Shape

Spacecraft size

Spacecraft dimensions must
accommodate payload dimensions

Chaps. 9,
10,11,13

Payload Power

Spacecraft power

Spacecraft power Is equal to payload
power plus an aDowance for the
spacecraft bus and battery recharging

Chap. 9,
10.2,10.3

Spacecraft
Weight

Spacecraft size

Spacecraft density wiD be between
20 kg/m3 and 172 kg/m3. Average Is
79kg/mS

Sees.
10.2,10.3

Spacecraft Power Solar array area

The solar array will produce approJd-

Sec. 11.4

mately 100 W/~ of projected area

Solar Array Area

Solar array type

If required solar array area Is larger than Sec.11.4
area available on equipment compartment, then external panels are required

Booster Diameter Spacecraft
diameter

Spacecraft diameter Is generally less
than the booster diameter

Pointing
Requirements

Two axes of control are required for each Sec.11.1
article to be pointed. Attitude control of
the spacecraft body provides 3 axes of
control

Spacecraft body
orientation and
number of
articulated joints

Sec.10.2,
Table 18-3

TABLE 10-&. Estimating Spacecraft Equipment Compartment Dimensions.

Step

Procedure

Comments

1. Payload Weight

SterlIng point

Sec. 9.1

2. Estimate Spacecraft
Dry Weight

Multiply payload weight by
between 2 and 7

Average Is 3.3

3. Estimate Spacecraft
Propellant

Prepare a bottom-up
propellant budget or
arbltrarlJy select a weight

Normal range Is 0% to 25% of
spacecraft dry weight (Table 10-7)

4. Estimate Spacecraft
Volume

DMde spacecraft loaded
weight by esIImeted density

Range of density is 20-172 kg/m3;
Average Is 79 kg/mS

5. SeJect Equipment
Compartment Shape
and DImensions

Shape and dimensions
should match pay~d
dimensions and fit within the
boostar diameter

In the folded configuration,
spacecraft are cylindrically
symmetric about the booster thrust
axis. Cross-sectional shapes range
from triangular to circular.

compartment using a density of 100 kg/m3. Figure 10-1 shows examples of various
spacecraft compartment shapes.
Spacecraft solar arrays are of two types: body mounted and panel mounted. Examples of both types are shown in Fig. 10-1. An array produces about 100 W1m2 of
projected solar cell area. This is unregulated power and represents an array efficiency
of 7%. To use this rule of thumb, we need to estimate the total spacecraft power, as

10.2

Spacecraft Configuration

313

described in Sec. 10.3. However for initial configuration selection, we need only
bound the power requirements and see if there is sufficient area on the equipment
compartment to allow body-mounted cells. At a minimum, power must be provided
for the payload. Prudent design would also make some allowance for spacecraft bus
power and battery recharge power which are discussed in more detail in Sec. 10.3. If
there is insufficient area on the spacecraft body for a body-mounted array, then we are
forced to use panels.
Evaluation of pointing and attitude control on spacecraft configuration starts with
identifying all pointing requirements (see Table 010.. 13) for both the spa~ bus IlD;d
payload. The process of synthesizing a control approach t? meet th~ ~ments IS
discussed in Sec. 10.4.2. Although we must go through this process m detail to see the
full effect of pointing on the spacecraft configuration, the basic implications can be
derived by the process and rules of thumb in Table 10-5. The spacecraft configuration
must provide 2 axes of control for each item that is to be pointed. The spacecraft body
has 3 axes so the body alone can satisfy one pointing requirement; for instance, one
body axis (Le.• the yaw axis) can be pointed toward nadir by control about the other 2
axes (roll and pitch). If tWo items are to be pointed, then the spacecraft must be
configured with at least one articulated joint between the two items. For illustration, a
body-mounted antenna can be pointed toward nadir by controlling 2 axes of body
attitude. A solar array can then simultaneously be pointed toward the Sun by using the
third body axis and providingoa single axis solar array drive to control the solar array
attitude relative to the body. This approach is called yaw steering (see 000,
Fig. 10-1C). If the spacecraft has a second item that must point in another direction
(say, an antenna that must point toward a communication relay satellite), th~ the
configuration must provide 2 more axes of control. The TORS spacecraft shown m Fig
100lB has 3 separate articulated antennas with a total of 6 mechanical axes of control
in addition to 3 axes 9f body attitude control and I axis of solar array control. DSP,
shown in Fig IO-IB, has a body-mounted payload and uses control of two body axes
to point toward nadir. The third body axis is used to scan the payload field-of..view. A 0
communication antenna is articulated about 2 axes to point toward a ground station,
and although solar array panels are used to augment the solar array area. the array is
not articulated.
Spin stabilization is a particularly simple and robust method of attitude control.
Satellites that employ spin stabilization are often cylindrical, such as DSCS n shown
in Fig IO-IA. For such a satellite, the spin axis supplies I axis of control by using a
motor-driven platform that is despun (spinning in a negative sense relative to the
satellite body). This is sometimes called a dual-spin system. Equipment mounted on
the despun platform can be articulated about additional axes to achieve further pointing capability.
The attitude control method may also interact with the solar array configuration.
Solar panels may be body-fixed such as Explorer VI and DSP, or they may be articulated, as shown on 000 and TORS in Fig. 10-1. Spin-stabilized spacecraft usually
have body-fixed arrays, and 3-axis-controlled spacecraft generally use articulated
panels. The power generated by a solar array is proportional to the area th;lt intercepts
sunlight (the projected area). A planar array which is pointed toward the Sun has a
ratio of total array area to projected area of one. A cylindrical array which has its
axis perpendicular to the Sun line has a ratio of lin and an array which projects equal
area in all directions has a ratio of 114. The method of solar array pointing control and
the type of array selected therefore affect the total array area.

314

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

10.3

Sometimes a spacecraft configuration is driven to use long booms either to control
spacecraft moment of inertia or to separate delicate instruments from the spacecraft
body electrical fields. GEOSAT, shown in Fig. 1001C, uses a boom to increase the
moment of inertia and provide gravity-gradient attitude stabilization, a passive attitude
control technique described in Sec. 11.1. 000, also shown in Fig. 10-1 C, uses booms
to isolate payload magnetometers from the spacecraft body.

10.3 Design Budgets
We begin allocating performance by establishing budgets* or allocations for
propellant. power, weight. and reliability. We can derive the propellant budget by
estimating the propellant requirements for velocity changes (orbit correction and
maintenance) and attitude control. At first. we estimate the power budget by adding
the payload's power requirements to power estimates for the spacecraft bus
subsystems. To derive the first weight budget for the spacecraft, we add the payload
weight to estimates for the spacecraft bus, including propulsion components and
power components. We make the initial reliability budget by defining the probability
of achieving acceptable spacecraft performance and lifetime.
A typical propellant budget as shown in Table 10-7 contains four elements: velocity-control propellant, attitude-control propellant, margin, and residual. The velocitycorrection requirement is expressed as total velocity change or AV, which is obtained
from Sec. 7.3. Chapter 17 presents the rocket equation Eq. (17-21) by which we
corivert velocity change to propellant mass. Attitude-control propellant is used for spin
stabilization and maneuvering while spinning, countering disturbance torques (including control during AV thrusting), attitude maneuvering, and limit cycling or
oscillation. Formulas for these entries are presented in Sec. 10.4.2 and summarized in
Table 10-7. Propellant margin is a percentage of the identified propellant requirement,
typically 25% for p~liminary design. 1% or 2% is unavailable propellant.
TABLE 10-7. Propellant Budget.
Elements
Velocity Correction and qontrol
Attitude Control
Splnup and despln
Maneuvering while spinning
CanceUing disturbance torque
Control during ll.V thrusting
Attitude maneuvering
Umltcycling
Nominal Propellant
MargIn
Residual
Total Propellant

• See p. 4 in Chap. 1 for the definition of a budget.

Reference
Eqs. (17-9), (7-14), Table 7-3
Secs.10.42,11.1
Eq. (10-9)
Eq. (10-11)
Table 10-18
Table 10-18 and Eqs. (10-8a,b)
Eq. (10-3)
Eqs. (10-5) through (10-7)
Sum of above
100/0-25% of nominal
1%-2% of total
Sum of above

10.3

Design Budgets

315

Table 10-8 outlines the three steps for estimating spacecraft power requirements.
Frrst. we prepare an operating power budget by estimating the power required by the
payload and the spacecraft subsystems. If the spacecraft has several operating modes
that differ in power requirements, we must budget separately for each mode, paying
particular attention to peak power needs for each subsystem. The second step is battery
sizing, or selecting the battery capacity appropriate to the spacecraft power requirements and battery cycle life. With size established, we can compute the battery's
recharge power. The third step is accounting for power-subsystem degradation over
the mission life by computing radiation damage to the solar array.
TABLE 10-8. Steps In Preparing a Power SudgeL
Step
1. Prepare Operating
Power Budget

2. Size the Battery

3. Estimate Power
Degradation Over
Mission LHe

Whafs Involved
Estimate power requirements for
payload and each spacecraft bus
subsystem
Estimate power level that the battery
must supply
Compute discharge cycle duration,
charge cycle duration, and number of
charge-dlscharge cycles
Select depth of discharge
Select charge rate
Compute battery recharge power
Compute degradation of power
system from orbital environment

Where Discussed
Chaps.9,1','3
GeneraDy equal to or less than
the operating power level
Determined by orbit selection
and mission duration (Chap. 7)
Sec.".4
Sec.".4
Sec.11.4
Secs.8.1,11.4

Table 10-9 lists references that discuss operating power for the payload and the
spacecraft bus subsystems, and shows typical percentages of the operating power
budget devoted to each subsystem. These percentages change with the spacecraft's
total power use, so I have presented ranges for a minimum «100 W), a small (200 W),
and a medium to large spacecraft (500-10,000 W). We can use these values as a starting point if we do not have more information, but Sec. 10.6 and Chap. 11 give specific
examples of various power requirements.
Sections 10.4.6 and 11.3 discuss battery recharge power. At the minimum, the
recharge energy must exceed the energy drawn from the battery duriJ;lg discharge by
an amount that accounts for the efficiency of the charge-discharge process (typically
80%). Most batteries also require recharge at a minimum rate-speeified as a fraction
of battery capacity (typically 1115). These two requirements translate into recharge
power ranging from 7% of the discharge power for geosynchronous orbits to 60% for
low-altitude orbits.
.
The solar array must supply enough power for operations and recharging the
battery until end-of-life. The beginning-of-life power requirement must allow for
degradation in the solar array. As Sec. 11.4 points out, this· degradation depends on
orbit altitude and radiation environment. but 30% is typical for 10 years at geosynchronous altitude. We can assume the same value for altitudes of 800 km or less_
Between these altitudes the degradation is much larger.
Table 1()"10 shows the build-up of spacecraft weight. As pointed out in Sec. IO~
the ratio of spacecraft dry weight to payload weight lies in the range of 2: 1 to 7: 1; the
payload weight is typically less than half the spacecraft dry weight and may be as little

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

316

10.3

TABLE 10-9. Typical Power Consumption by Module or Subsystem.
Spacecraft Size
Spacecraft Power

Minimum

« 100 Wtotal)

% of Operating Power
Small
Medium to Large
(-200W)
(>500W)

References

Subsystem"
Payload

40

2O-50W

Propulsion

40-80

0

0

0-5
5-10

Chaps. 9,13

Attitude Control

0

15

Communications

15W

5

5-10

Command &
Data Handling

5W

5

5-10

Sec. 10.4.1, Chap. 17
Sees. 10.4.2, 11.1
Sees. 10.4.3, 11.2
Sees. 10.4.4,11.3

0

5

0-5

Sees. 10.4.5, 11.5

10-30W

30
0

5-25

Sees. 10.4.6, 11.4
Sees. 10.4.7, 11.6

Thermal
Power
Structure

0

0

T

Design Budgets

10.3

as 15% of the dry weight. Spacecraft structure weight generally falls in the range of
15% to 25% of spacecraft dry weight (see Appendix A). Spacecraft structural weight
may also be estimated at 8% to 12% of injected weight (dry weight + propellant +
injection stage). Spacecraft thenna1 subsystem weight is between 2% and 5% of spacecraft dry weight. Weight percentages for other subsystems vary widely and require
more detailed investigation. (See Sec. 10.43, Chaps. 11 and 17.) To account for
uncertainties during preliminary design we add 25% to these weights for new equipment and 5% or less for known hardware. We should hold a small allowance (1 % to
2%) at the system level to account for integration hardware, such as brackets and
mounting hardware, which are often overlooked.
TABLE 10-11. Preparing a Re"ab"lty Budget.

Step

TABLE 10-10. Weight Budget. The percentages shown in the right-hand column are the
percent of spacecraft dry weight
WeIght

Element
Payl~d

MplL

Spacecraft Subsystems

Mss

Propulsion

Reference
Comments
Chaps.9,13 15% to 50% of Mdry
Sum of subsystem wts

Mpropulslon

Chap.17

Attitude Control

Mgnc

Sec. 11.1

Communications

Mcom

Sec. 11.2

Command &
Data Handling

Mcadh

Sec. 11.3

Thermal

Mth

Sec. 11.5

Power

Map

Sec. 11.4

Structure & Mechanisms

Msam

Sec. 11.6

8"k to 12% of MInJ or

15% to 25% of Mdry

Margin

Mmar

Spacecraft Dry Weight

Mdry = MplL + Mss + Mmar

Propellant

Mprop

Loaded Weight

Mioaded = Mdry + Mprop

Chap. 17

Mkick

Sec. 17.3

Kick Stage

2% to 5% of Mdry

5% to 25% of wt based
on design maturity
Table 1()"'7

Injected Weight

Min) = M10aded + Mkick

Adapter

Madapter

Sec. 11.6

Boosted Weight

Mboosted = MInJ + ~r

Chap. 18

Comments

Reference

1. Establish mission
success criteria

The criteria should be numerical and mey have
Chaps. 1,2,3
multiple elements. For instance, a communication
spacec'1lft having multiple channels for several
types of service might define success as one
channel of each type of service or as a total number
of channels and total radiated power.

2. Assign numerical
success probability to
each element of the
mission success
criteria and define the
method for computing
success probability

This might be stated as a probability of 0.5 of .
Sec. 19.2
operating service "A" for 5 years and a probability of
0.7 of operating service "B" for 2 years and 0.4 of
operating service "B" for 7 years. For each element
of the success criteria, numerical values and
associated lifetimes are assigned.
Several methods of evaluating success probabirrty
are avallable-see Chap. 19.

Average Power: Sum of above
Margin: 50/0 to 25% of power based on design maturity
Total Average Requirement for Operating Power: Total of above
• Includes conversion and Une losses.

317

3. Create the reDabiJity
If, for instance, a system reDability of 0.6 Is required, Sec. 19.2
budget by allocating the it might be allocated as:
success probability
Propulsion
0.95
Comm
0.93
(reliability) to each item
Structure
0.99
C&DH
0.93
of hardware & software
0.99
Thermal
Power
0.93
ADCS
0.9
Payload
0.89
4. Evaluate the system
reliabirrty and iterate the
design to maximize
reliability and identify
and eliminate faUure
modes

Assuming independent, serial operation, hardware Sec. 19.2
faUure rate is generany evaluated by summing
piece part failure rates. (See Chap. 19 and
MIL-HDBK-17 [1991].) Failure mode analysis
and enmlnation are discussed in Sec. 10.4. Effect
of failures can be reduced and reliability raised by
changing the design, selecting more reliable
hardware, or adding redundant hardware and
software.

From the start of the spacecraft design we must design our hardware and software
to achieve reliable operation. The process of design-for-reliability starts in the conceptual design phase with the determination of system reliability requirements and
allocation of these requirements to the spacecraft subsystems. This is a four-part
process as shown in Table 10-11. FIrSt. we establish the mission success criteria.
which is a list of events and operations that together constitute success. Second, we
assign a numerical probability to meeting each element of the mission success criteria
and select a set of ground rules for computing the probability of success. Third, we
allocate reliability requirements to all spacecraft hardware and software. Fourth, we

318

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

10.4

evaluate system reliability and iterate the design to maximize the reliability assessment; and identify and eliminate failure modes. (See Sees. 10.5.2 and 19.2 for further
discussions of reliability.)

10.4 Designing the Spacecraft Bus
10.4.1 Propulsion Snbsystem
The propulsion equipment for a spacecraft inclUdes tankage to hold the propellant,
lines and pressure-regulating equipment, and the engines or thrusters. Common
propellants are pressurized gas such as nitrogen, selected monopropellants such as
hydrazine, and bipropellants. The pressurized feed systems typically used may be
pressure regulated or blow down. Important design parameters are the number, orientation, and location of the thrusters; the thrust level; and the amount of impulse
required. Chapter 17 discusses the design of propulsion subsystems and characteristics
of propulsion components.
The propulsion tanks rest at or near the spacecraft's center of mass to avoid shifting
of the center of mass as the propellant is used. Engines for translational control are
aligned to thrust through the center of mass, whereas engines for attitude control thrust
tangentially and are mounted as far away from the center of mass as possible to
increase the lever arm and thus increase the torque per unit thrust Attitude control
engines which fire in the direction of flight (along or in opposition to the velocity
vector) are generally used in pairs to produce a pure torque without net linear force.
However, the spacecraft flight path is less sensitive to thrust at right angles to the
velocity vector and single attitude control engines are sometimes used in these
directions. Three-axis control requires a minimum of 6 attitude control thrusters, and
many designs use 8 to 12 plus backup units for reliability.
Table 10-12 gives weight and power estimates for the propulsion subsystem.
Chapter 17 gives more detailed weights and See. 10.6 offers examples of integrated
designs. The propulsion subsystem does not use much electrical power unless it
empl01s thrusters with heated catalyst beds, heated thrusters, or electric propulsion.
Electric propulsion is rare, but heated thrusters are common. Propulsion lines and.
tanks must be protected from freezing, usually by thermostatically controlled guard
heaters. Power for these heaters is included in the thermal subsystem. Electrically
operated solenoid valves control propellant flow to the thrusters, but we account for
their power in the ADC subsystem.
TABLE 10-12. Weight and Power Budget for Propulsion Subsystem. See Sec. 17.4 for
specific design information.
Component

Weight (kg)

Power(W)

Propellant

Table 10-7

-

Tank

10"k of propellant
weight

-

Thrusters

0.35-0.4 kg for
SWper
0.44 to 4.4 N hydrazine thruster
units
when firing

Unes, Valves, Dependent on detailed

& RtJJngs

spacecraft design

-

Comments
Added to overall budget In Table 10-7;
not part of propulsion subsystem
Tanks for compressed gas may be up to
SO"k of gas weight

Example spacecraft of Sec. 10.6 used
6.8 kg (HEAO) & 7.S kg (FLTSATCOM)

T

Designing the Spacecraft Bus

10.4

319

10.4.2 Attitude Determination and Control Subsystem
Attitude control requirements are based on those for payload pointing and the
spacecraft bus pointing. Table 10-13 lists possible design requirements. If we must
control the attitude of all or part of the payload, we have to decide whether to point the
entire spacecraft or to articulate the payload or part of the payload. In the extreme case
of a scanning payload fixed to the spacecraft's body, we must scan with the entire
spacecraft. Similar decisions are necessary for parts of the spacecraft that need orienting in other directions such as pointing at the Sun.
TABLE 10-13. Typical Sources of Requirements for Attitude Control.
Requirement

Information Needed

Payload Requirements:
ArtIcle to be Pointed

Entire payload or some payload subset such as
antennas or a thermal radiator

Pointing Direction

Defined relative to what reference

Pointing Range

All of the possible pointing directions

POinting Accuracy

Absolute angular control requirement

Pointing Knowledge

Knowledge of pointing direction either In real time
or after the fact

Pointing Stablrdy

Maximum rate of change of anguler orientation

Slew Rate

Reorientation from one pointing direction to another
in a specified time

Exclusion Zones

For example, 'not wlthfn 10 deg of the Sun"

Other Requirements:
Sun Pointing

May need for power generation or thermal control

Pointing During Thrusting

May need for guidance corrections

Communications Antenna Pointing

Toward a ground station or relay satellite

Pointing in a particular direction requires control of angular orientation about each
of the 2 axes ~ndicular to the pointing axis. If, for example.· a payload or antenna
must point toward the Earth, we need to control its attitude about 2 horizontal axes. If
the payload is fixed to the spacecraft's body, these 2 axes are 2 of the 3 axes. Thus, we
can use the third axis-rotation about the pointing axis-to satisfy a second pointing
requirement, such as pointing one axis in the direction of flight Table 10-14 lists types
of pointing systems.
Either spin stabilization or 3-axis control using sensors and torquerS can be used to
control the spacecraft's attitude. Spin stabilization divides into passive spin, spin with
precession control, or dual spin (spin with a despun platform). ClasseS of 3-axis
control depend on the sensor type or torquing method. Possible sensors include Earth,
Sun and star sensors, gyroscopes, magnetometers, and directional antennas. Torquers
include gravity gradient, magnetic, thrusters, and wheels. Wheels include variable
speed reaction wheels; momentum wheels, which have a nominal nonzero speed and
therefore provide angular momentum to the spacecraft; and control moment gyros,

320

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

10.4

which are fixed-speed gimballed wheels. Table 10-15 summarizes these methods of
control during thrusting and nonthrusting.
TABLE 10-14•. Design Approaches for Selected Pointing Requirements.
Requirement

Nadir-Pointed Payload

Payload Pointed In a
Rxed-Inertial Direction
Sun-Oriented Solar Anay

Communications Antenna

System

DesIgning the Spacecraft Bus

10.4

321

usually heavier than spin-stabilized ones, and we may need to consider both
approaches carefully before deciding between them. Table 10-16 summarizes how
various requirements affect this decision.
TABLE 10-18. ImpUcatlon of Pointing Requirements on Attitude Control Approach.

Body-fixed payload using 2 axes of body attitude control to meet
the Earth-pointing requirement The third axis Is used to point a
horizontal axis In the direction of ffighl

Control during k1ck-stage firing

Spin stabilization preferred in most cases

Can also use spln-stabDized spacecraft with spin axis normal to
the orbit plane and payload mounted on despun platform.

eoarse control (> 10 deg)

Spin stabilization or passive control using gravity gradient

Low-accuracy pointing (> 0.1 deg) Either 30axls control or dual spin

Body-fixed payload using 2 axes of body attitude for payloadpointing direction in inertial space. Third axis Is used to keep one
side toward the Sun.

High-accuracy pointing « 0.1 deg) 30axis control

Planar array requires 2 axes of control. May be achieved by
1 axis of body attitude and 1 rotation axis.
Cylindrical array with array axis perpendlciJlar to Sun line.
2-axls mechanism.

TABLE 10-15. Types of Attitude Control.
Control Mode

Type of Control

Control During Thrusting:
Spin StabDization with Axial Thrust

Passive spin in a fixed direction with thrust apprled
parallel to the spin axis.

Spin StablHzation with Radial Thrust

Passive spin In a fixed direction with thrust applied
perpendicular to the spin axis in short pulses.

3-Axis Control

Attitude is sensed with sensors whose output is used to
control torquers. Torquers Include thrusters operated
off-on or swiveled to control thrust direction.

Control While Not Thrusting:
Spin StabDization with
Precession Control

T

Spin direction Is controQed by applying precession
torque with an off-axis thruster.

Dual Spin

Spin-stabilized with a despun platform.

30Axis Control

Control USing attitude sensors and torquers.

We use spin stabilization extensively for attitude control during kick-stage firing
and fm: small spacecraft. Spin-stabilized satellites with a despun platform, called a
dual spm system, frequently support communications payloads. In this case, we mount
th~ p~yload antenna on !he despun platfonn so we can control its pointing. If the spin
llXlS IS roughly perpendicular to the Sun line, we can mount solar cells on the spacecraft's cylindrical skin to produce electric po~er.
Three-axis approaches range from passive control using gravity gradient or magnetics to full active control with propulsion thrusters and wheels. Passive techniques
can proVIde coarse control to support low-accuracy pointing requirements and simple
spacecraft. The active 3-axis method gives us highly accurate pointing control more
efficient solar arrays (by allowing oriented planar arrays), and pointing of ~veral
payloads or spacecraft appendages. But active 3-axis systems are more complex and

Requirement

Low power requirement « 1 kW)

ImpllcaUon

Either oriented planar array or spinning cylindrical array

High power requirement (> 1 kW)

Oriented planar array

Multiple pointing requirements

30axls control

Attitude slewing requirement

Dual spin with articulation mechanism or 3 axis with wheels

The guidance and navigation function on most spacecraft is a basic form of radio
guidance. It uses ground tracking to measure the flight path (or spacecraft ephemeris),
ground computing of desired velocity corrections, and command of the correction
through the communications and command subsystems. The direction of the velocity
correction is governed by the attitude control of the spacecraft body and the magnitude
is controlled by engine firing time. Two elements limit perfonnance: ground-tracking
and spacecraft attitude-control during thrusting. The Global Positioning System (GPS)
may provide another way to measure the flight path. Coupled with an appropriate
guidance computer, a GPS receiver should be able to guide the boost phase and allow
the spacecraft to navigate autonomously in orbit, at least for low altitudes. Other
autonomous navigation methods are also available (see Sec.I!.7). Guiding spacecraft
to intercept or rendezvous usually requires a guidance radar, a gyroscope reference
assembly, and often accelerometers.
Accurate attitude control depends on the attitude sensors. Table 10-17 summarizes
what present sensors can do. Each sensor class is available iIi either a 1- or 2-axis
version. Magnetometers, Earth sensors, and Sun sensors are available in forms which
use the spin motion of a spinning spacecraft to scan the sensor's field of view. Some
magnetometers and Earth and Sun sensors do not require scanning, but some highly
accurate Earth sensors use scanning detectors. Magnetometers apply only to altitudes
below about 6,000 km because the Earth's magnetic field falls off rapidly with altitude. Uncertainty in the Earth's magnetic field and its variability with time limits the
accuracy of a magnetometer. In the same way, horizon uncertainty limits an Earth
sensor's accuracy. Star sensors, however, allow us to measure attitude very accurately.
Most star sensors are too slow (typically several seconds) to control a spacecraft's
attitude directly, so we nonna1Iy use them with gyroscopes for high accuracy and rapid
response. Gyroscope accuracy is limited by instrument drift, so most gyroscope systems are used in conjunction with an absolute reference such as a star sensor or a
directional antenna.
After-the-fact processing can improve our knowledge of attitude. For example, we
can monitor the Earth's magnetic field continuously and therefore partially correct the
variable effects of magnetic sensing. Variations in the Earth's horizon tend to follow
a daily cycle, so we can apply some filtering correction.

322

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

ID.4

TABLE 111-17. Ranges of Sensor Accuracy. Microprocessor-based sensors are likely to
Improve accuracies in the future.
Sensor

Magnetometers

Earth Sensors
Sun Sensors
Star Sensors

Accuracy
1.00 (5,000 km aft)
50 (200 km alt)

0.05 deg (GEO)
0.1deg Qowaltltude)
0.01 deg

Gyroscopes

2 arc sec
0.001 deg/hr

Directional Antennas

0.01deg to 0.5 deg

Characteristics and Applicability
Attitude measured relative to Earth's local
magnetic field. Magnetic field uncertainties
and variability dominate accuracy. Usable
only below -6,000 km.
Horizon uncertainties dominate accuracy.
Highly accurate units use scanning.
Typical field of view ±130 deg.
Typical field of view ±16 deg.

T

Designing the Spacecraft Bus

10.4

tied value, as shown in Fig. 10-2A. The relation between required torque T. the tip-off
rate, {J)t (in radls), spacecraft moment of inertia, Is, and the maximum attitude excursion, 8max (in rad), is:
(10-1)

The torquing ability of a thruster system, a reaction wheel, a control moment gyrop or
a pointing mechanism may be set by an acceleration requirement such as that arising
from an attitude slew maneuver, shown in Fig 10-2B. The torque is simply Ia where I
is the moment of inertia and a is the acceleration. Sometimes the attitude maneuver is
specified as a change in angle of 8 in a time tdur. The torque in this case is:

Normal use Involves periodically resetting the
reference position.
Typically 1% of the antenna bearnwidth.

The attitude-control system can also produce attitude motions which combine with
the attitude sensor's accuracy to affect the total control accuracy. Control systems that
use thrusters alone require a dead zone to avoid continuous firing of the thrusters. The
control system's accuracy is limited to half the dead-zone value plus the sensor
accuracy. Systems which use wheels (either speed-controlled reaction wheels or
gimballed constant-speed wheels) can avoid dead-zone attitude errors, so they usually
can operate close to the sensor accuracy.
Torquing methods for 3-axis-controlled"spacecraft include gravity gradient, magnetic, thrusters, and wheels. Spacecraft using gravity-gradient and magnetic torquing
are clean and simple but do not provide high levels of control torque. We use thrusters
on most spacecraft because they produce large tOrque and can control the spacecraft's
translational velocity as well as attitude. If the spacecraft must maneuver or suffers
cyclical disturbances, such as those at orbit rate or twice orbit rate (see Chap. 11), we
need to use wheels. A wheel can cyclically speed up or slow down, thus producing
maneuvering torque or counteracting disturbance torques. A wheel system consum~
less propellant than a thruster-only system because periodic effects do not require
propellant use. On the other hand, wheel systems are heavier and more complex than
those without wheels. Variable-speed reaction wheels produce only limited control
torque (less than IN· m). To obtain large values of cyclic torque, we use control
moment gyros-constant~speed wheels gimballed about an axis perpendicular to the
spin axis. These gyros can develop torques up to several thousand N • m. When we need
more degrees of freedom or better pointing accuracy, we use mechanisms to point
spacecraft appendages, such as solar arrays or directional antennas.

Estimating Torque Requirements
One important sizing parameter for the control subsystem is· its torque capability.
This capability, often called the control authority, must be large enough to counterbalance disturbance torques and control the attitude during maneuvers and following
transient events such as spacecraft separation, deployment, and failure recovery.
These latter events usually size the torque requirement The separation transient is
~y specified in terms of tip-off rate-the angular velocity, typically 0.1 to 1 deg/s,
unparted to the spacecraft at release from the booster. We size the attitude control
thrusters to capture or stabilize the spacecraft attitude before it has exceeded a speci-

323

=4811 tdur2

T

(10-2)

As Fig. 10-2B shows, this is based on applying full accelerating torque for tdurl2 and
full decelerating torque for the remaining time.
Attitude
A
6 J i g l e i C'r

~."'_m,

9

AttItude
Angle' !
6
Torque

-

L

Tlma

A. Attitude Capture FollOwing Separation

tdur
tdur /2

j

TIme

B. Attitude Maneuver In 1lma, tdUT

Rg.111-2. EstImating Torque for Attitude Capture and Maneuvering.

The control torque required to stabilize a spacecraft during velocity-correction
fning of a rocket motor is the product of the rocket's thrust level and the distance that
its "line-of-action is offset from the spacecraft center-of-mass. This torque can be due
either to thruster misalignment or cg offset (see Table 10-18).

Estimating Angular Impulse for 3-Axis Control
Another major sizing parameter for the attitude control subsystem is the angular
impulse capability of its torquers. Angular impulse is the time integral of torque. For
thruster-produced torque, the angular impulse is related to the propellant mass expended. For reaction wheels and control moment gyros, the angular impulse is related
to wheel moment of inertia and speed. In all cases, angular impulse is related to control
system weight.
For 3-axis control systems, we calculate angular impulse by evaluating that needed
for attitude maneuvering, for counteracting the effects of disturbance torques, and for
oscillation or limit cycling. We determine the angular impulse required for maneuvering from spacecraft moment of inertia and maneuver angular rate. The angular
impulse required to start an attitude maneuver LstaTt is:
(10-3)

Where Is is spacecraft moment of inertia and {J)man is the angular rate (radls) of the

324

Spaeecraft Design and Sizing

1D.4

TABLE 10-18. DIsturbance Torques. These are vector equations where ">(' denotes vector
cross product and "." denotes vector dot product. See Sec. 11.1 for simplified
equations.
Disturbance
Equation
Definition of Terms
l>.VThruste, sxT
s vector distance from center of
MisaDgnment
mass to thrust application point
T vector thrust
Aerodynamic
p atmospheric density
Torque
~pV2CdA(Uy x scp)
Cd drag coefficient (typically 2.25)
A

area perpendicular to Uy
velocity
Uy unit vector in velocity direction
scp vector distance from center of
mass to center of pressure
V

Gravity
Gradient
Torque

3~

lie x(l· ue)

Ro

Sola,
Radiation
Torque
Ks(us • un) A

[,.(0.,,)+
1
{
2 } x Sc
un 2rS+'3'd

Earth's gravitational coefficient
3.986 x 1014 rrfdls 2
Ro Distance to Earth's center (m)
I Spececraft inertia tensor
ue Unit vector toward nadir
Ks soiar pressure constant
4.644 x 1O-S Nlm2
Sc vector from spacecraft
center of mass to area A
Un unit vector normal to A
Us unit vector toward the Sun
a surface absorptivity coefficient
surface specular reflectance
coefficient
'd surface diffuse reflectance
coefficient
(Note: a+ 's+ 'd= 1)
I.L

10.4

325

Designing the Spacecraft Bus

and comes about when the spacecraft dynamic equations are written in rotating
coordinates. TE is the torque, g is the angular velocity of the coordinate system, and
lis is the spacecraft angular mom~tum including th~t due to ~Y rotation ~d
internal moving parts (such as reaction wheels). For a crrcular orbIt and the dynamIC
equations written in a coordinate system whi.ch rota~ at orbit rate, the Euler crosscoupling torques are of the same form as graVIty-gradIent torques and.these effects are
often combined.
Note that, for any single axis, the disturbance torque may have cyclic terms that
integrate to zero over an integer number o~ cycles and secu~ ~ tha! are not
periodic. Also note that angular impulse required for maneuvermg IS all cyclic. Reaction wheels and control moment gyros can counteract cyclic torques by changing
speed or direction. If we use reaction wheels or control moment gyros .(CMGs), we can
size them for the cyclic terms and counteract only the secular terms WIth thrusters. But
if we are designing a system that has no wheels or CMGs, we must expel propellant to
counteract all disturbances, and the angular impulse requirement is the sum of ~e time
iDtegrals of the absolute value of disturbance ~orque compute? about each axIS. The
process of computing control system an~ar Impul~e from disturbance torques and
identifying cyclic and secular components IS shown 10 Table 10-19.
Thruster control systems operate by pulsing a thruster when the attitu~e error
exceeds a set value known as the dead-zone limit. The thruster's design determ10es the
length of the pulse-typically from 0.02 sec to 0.1 sec. The propellant consump~on of
such a system is proportional to the size of. ~e pulses and the rate of ~ulse firing. A
well designed control system will fire a m10lmum length pulse each time th~ ~ead­
zone liIl\it is exceeded. The angular velocity change, A(f), produced by a mmtmum
pulse Pmin is:

's

maneuver. Stopping the maneuver requires an equal amount of angular impulse of
opposite polarity.
To compute angular impulse to cancel disturbance torques, we examine the
disturbances affecting the spacecraft as shown in Table 10-18. These disturbance
torques are all vector quantities. They can be expressed in any convenient system of
coordinates, although spacecraft body coordinates are generally used. For a given
spacecraft configuration, orbit, and spacecraft attitude, these torques can be computed
and integrated over the spacecraft lifetime. The result is the accumulated angular
impulse which. if uncontrolled, will disturb the spacecraft attitude. The control subsystem must counteract these disturbance torques by applying control torque and the
control subsystem angular impulse capability must be at least equal to the disturbance
angular impulse.
In addition to the disturbance torques listed in Table 10-18, the control system may
be sized by the requirement to interchange momentum between spacecraft body axes
(sometimes referred to as Euler cross-coupling torque). Numerically this torque-like
effect is:
(10-4)

(10-5)
where P . = T st· , T is thrust level of the thruster, s is the lever arm through
which th:"thruster w~ks to produce torque, tmin is the minimum thruster firing time,
and I is the spacecraft's moment of inertia. The mean angular velocity of the spacecraft ~hile in the dead-zone is A(f)/2 which implies that the spacecriUt transverses
a dead-zone of 2ed in 4ed l A(f) seconds. Since the pulse firin~ time is negligib~e relative to the time spent in traversing the dead-zone, the average Impulse rate, IR, IS one
minimum pulse every 4ed l A(f) seconds, or:
(10-6)

IR=p2minl(46dls)

The total angular impulse expended during the mission,
duration:

L""

is IR times mission

L", =IR * mission duration
(10-7)
The torque produced by a thruster is equal to its thrust T times its lever anD s. The
time integral of thrust is linear impulse and is related to the mass of propellant used by
the rocket equation (Eq. 17-6). An appropriate expression relating angular impulse to
propellant use is:
L=sJ Tdt=.s lspgmp

(10-8a)

or equivalently:
(10-8b)

326

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

10.4

TABLE 10-19. Computing Control System Angular Impulse Requirements.
Step

Operation

Comments

1. Calculate disturbance
torques

Use equations in Table 10-18

2. Compute time integral of
disturbance torque for
each control axis

Lx = fTdxclt

Lz = fTdz clt
3. IdentlfycycOc and secular
components of angular
impulse

Angular
Impulse
~

Secular
Component

~

Designing the Spacecraft Bus

10.4

Weight
(kg)

Power
(W)

Earth Sensor

2to3.5

2to 10

Sun Sensor

0.2 to 1

o to 0.2

control axes

Magnetometer

0.2 to 1.5

0.2 to 1

Tdx, Tdy, Tdz disturbance
torques about x, y, and z
control axes

Gyroscope

0.Bto3.5

5to20

Either identify cycDc
components from the
equations or plot each
component of angular impulse
to identify components

327

TABLE 10-20; Weight and Power of Components In an Attitude Determination and Control
Subsystem. Note TsTorqLiein N·m, and Hs anguJar momentum in N·m·s.
Component

Lx, L~, Lz angular impulse
requ rements about x, y, and z

Ly = fTdycit

r

Star Sensor

5to50

2to2O

Processors

5 to 25

5to25.

Reaction Wheels

2+0.4x H
5+0.1 xH

Control
Moment Gyros

35 +0.05 x H
100 < H < 2,500

15 to 30 standby;
0.02 to 0.2 W / (N •m) when torquing

Actuators
(single axis)

4+0.03x T

1to5W/(N'm)

H<10
10<H <100

10 to 20 at constant speed;
500 to 1,000 W/(N'm) when torquing

Component

The impulse requirement for spinup is:

TIme

4. Size torquers

Wheels or CMGs are sized for
the cycUC terms. Thrusters, if
used with wheels, are sized for
the secular terms.

5. If thruster control Is used
without wheels or CMGs, Lx = flTdx Icit
compute time integrals of
the absolute value of
Ly = fiTdy Icit
disturbance torque

Lz = flTdzldt

where L is angular impulse, t is time, ISfJ. is specific impulse, g is gravitational acceleration and 1np is propellant mass expended.
A reaction wheel produces torque by changing its speed. Its angular impulse
capability is equal to its moment of inertia times its maximum speed-its total angular
momentum. A control moment gyro produces torque by changing the direction of its
constant-speed momentum wheel. The angular impulse capability of a CMG is its
momentum (wheel mass moment of inertia times speed) times the angle through which
it can be moved. The relation between momentum and weight and power for wheels
and CMOs is presented in Table 10-20.

Estimating Angular Impulse for Spin Stabilization
For a spin-stabilized spacecraft, angular impulse is required for spinup, spin maintenance, and spin-axis precession. If the spacecraft is spin-stabilized for only part of
its mission (such as during kick-stage thrusting), then impulse is also needed for

despin.

Lspinup = Iss Q s

(10-9)

where Lspinup is the impulse required in N . m·s ,4s is the spacecraft moment of inertia
about the spIn axis in kg-m 2 , and Q s is the spin speed in rad/s. Typical values of spin
speed range from 0.1 radls for spacecraft requiring minimal spin stability to 10 radls
for stabilization during kick motor firing. Impulse required for despin is computed
with this same equation. Note that the inertia of the spacecraft during despin may be
different than during spinup.
The principal merit of spin stabilization is that it is passive; that is, a spin-stabilized
spacecraft will remain spinning at constant rate with its spin axis substantially fixed in
inertial space. However, if the spacecraft has a thrusting mode such as kick-stage firing
or thruster firing for velocity correction, both the spin speed and the spin axis orientation may be changed. Disturbance torques as presented in Table 10-18 may also make
spin corrections necessary.
Variation in spin speed occurs when the thruster's axis and spacecraft center of
mass are misaligned. If the offset between center of mass and the thrust axis is Lcm , the
angular impulse, MI, imparted by a velocity correction AV to a spacecraft of
mslc
is:

mass

MI=ms/cAVLcm

(10-10)

If the offset is in the direction that changes the spin speed. then impulse will be
required to correct spin speed. If the offset is along the spin axis, the spacecraft
angular-momentum vector will precess, thus changing the orientation of the spin axis.
In either event, impulse is required to correct the unwanted change. If spin-speed
correction is required, the impulse is about the spin axis and if precession is involved,
it is normal to the spin axis. Typical thruster alignment tolerance is 0.1 deg. TIris
tolerance,coupled with center of mass uncertainty, leads to typical thrust-axis to
center-of-mass offset of 0.OO2s-O.0ls where s is the distance from the thruster to the
center of mass.

328

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

10.4

To change the direction of spin-axis orientation. we must precess the angularmom~ntwn.vector. This is usually done by ~yJichronizing off-axis thruster pulses with

the SpIn penod of the spacecraft. The small Increments of angular impulse imparted by
properly synchronized firings add at 90 deg to the momentum vector to rotate the
vector ~ti?n. Some. nutation is ~so introduced by the thruster firings but this
decays WIth time. The Impulse reqwred to precess a spinning spacecraft through an
angle of a radians is
Lprecess

=IssDs a

(IO-H)

where Iss is ~e mass moment of inertia abo~t the spin axis, Ds is the spin speed (in
radls) and a IS the angle of rotation of the SPIn vector in radians.
The total angular impulse is converted to propellant weight through the use of
~. (1.0-10). Typical wei~t and p<?wer for attitude control components are summarized In Table 10-20 and discussed In Sec. 11.1. Actuators and wheels are available in
a large number of sizes and capabilities. Their weight and power as a function of
torque may be estimated by the relations given.
10.4.3 Communications Subsystem
The communications subsystem receives and demodulates uplink signals and
modulates and transmits dOWlllink signals. The subsystem also allows us to track
spacecraft by retransmitting received range tones or by providing coherence between
rece.ived and transmitted signals, so we can measure Doppler shift. Table 10-21 summanzes the main system considerations which drive the design of communications
subsystems.

T

For spacecraft communicating directly with ground ~a1s',received .siptal strength
is not a design driver because we can set the ground terminal s tranSmItting power as
high as necessary. However, received signal strength from a relay satellite does affect
the communications subsystem's receiver sensitivity and maximum data rate. Systems
that require data communications at rates greater than 1,000 bits/s normaIly use bighgain, directional antennas and can operate at low bit rates to allow wide-angle access
when needed.
The downlink signal consists of range tones, telemetry for spacecraft status, and
payload data. The baseband data is normally digital and multiplexed by frequency or
time. Telemetry to report the spacecraft's status operates between 100 bits/s and
1 000 bits/so If the downlink handles only status telemetry, or if the payload data will
fit within a low-bandwidth link, we can communicate using a widebeam antenna. Data
communication over a high bandwidth usually requires a high-gain, directional antenna and a low-bandwidth mode for widebeam coverage.
Table 10-22 shows how we size the communications subsystem. To do sO,we must
identify the data bandwidths of the uplink and. downlink, select communicati?n
frequencies, prepare RF power budgets for both links (Chap. 13), and select ~wp­
ment. The basic communications subsystem consists of a transmitter, a receIver, a
widebeam antenna, and an RF diplexer. We may also use a high-power transmitter or
a directional antenna if the data rate requires it.
TABLE 10-22. Steps In Designing a Communications Subsystem.
Whafs Involved

Step

2. Select Frequencies

Decide which of the
allowed bands to use

Sec. 13.1

Analyze characteristics
of RFUnks

Sec. 13.3

Implication

Access

Ability to communicate with the spacecraft requires clear field of view
to the receiving antenna and appropriate antenna gain

3. Prepare RF
Power Budget

Frequency

Selection based on bands approved for spacecraft use by Intemational
agreement Standard bands are S (2 GHz). X (8 GHz). and Ku (12 GHz)

4. Select Equipment

Baseband Data
Characteristics

Data bandwidth and allowable error rate determine RF power level
for communications

Communication access to a spacecraft requires a clear field of view for the
spacecraft antenna. It also requires sufficient received power to detect the signal with
acceptable error rate. Access across many viewing angles demands an antenna with a
wide ~wi~th, so good spacecraft d~igns always include an antenna system that
can receIve SIgnalS over at least a hemIsphere. The gain of a widebeam antenna is
low-typically 0 dB for hemispheric coverage. Therefore, we must select a level of
transmit power and a receiver sensitivity that allow us to detect signals with an
acceptable error rate.
The spacecraft receives data consisting of commands and range tones. Command
rates range from 100 bits/s to 100 kbits/s, with most systems below 1,000 bits/so The
data ~ depen~ on mi~on consid~tions and sets the communications subsystem's
bandWIdth, which establishes the receIved power required to detect signals (Chap. 13).

Reference
Payload commands and data--Chap. 9
Spacecraft bus commands and
telemetry-Secs. 10.4.3, 11.3

1. Identify Data Rate

TABLE 10-21. System Considerations for Design of Communications Subsystems.
Consideration

329

Designing the Spacecraft Bus

10.4

Sec. 11.2

Table 10-23 shows the characteristics of a standard communications subsystem. The
system operates at S-band, radiates 2 W, has i data rate of 1,000 bits/s, and weighs
5.9 kg. The transponder provides a coherent carrier response to measure range rates
and retransmits ranging tones. Section 11.2 describes other equipment in communications subsystems, including transmitters with higher power and directional
antennas.
TABLE 10-23. Characteristics of Communications Subsystems Using 8-band.
Component

Weight
(kg)

8-band Antenna

0.9

Power
(W)
0

Dip/exer

1.2

0

Receiver

1.8

4

Transmitter

2

4.4

Commen1s
Hemispheric pattem 0 dB

Two units required for redundancy

330

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

16.4

10.4.4 Command and Data Handling Subsystem

The command and data handling subsystem, (C&DH), receives and distributes
commands and collects, formats, and delivers telemetry for standard spacecraft
operations (housekeeping) and payload operations. We usually handle housekeeping
data intennittently and at rates below 1,000 bits/so Rates for payload commanding and
telemetry depend on the payload's design. They may require very high data rates
(10 kb/s to 500 Mb/s) and storage of payload data.
The C&DH subsystem may include encryptors, decryptors, a sequencer or timer, a
computer for data processing, and equipment for data storage. It interfaces with the
communications subsystem from which it receives commands and to which it sends
the formatted telemetry stream. It also delivers commands to and receives telemetry
from the other spacecraft subsystems and may have similar interfaces with the
payload.
The decoding of command signals is peculiar to the detailed design of the system.
A typical command is a serial binary word containing a preamble, a user address, and
the command word. The preamble allows the spacecraft to identify and authenticate
the command. The command unit decodes the user addresses and then routes actual
commands to the correct users, either by separate wires or by a data bus. Each user then
decodes and executes the command
In some cases, we need several commands to do something. If the function is time
critical, we can send precursor commands and verify their receipt before sending a
precisely timed execute or a time-tagged execute. A sequencer or onboard computer
can execute time-tagged commands. If we need to send commands over time, we can
time-tag them or use a timer-execute command followed by a sequence of timer-reset
commands. If the command system fails, the command halts when the timer times out
Ordnance normally requires separate arm and fire commands.
Telemetry signals tell us about the spacecraft's health and Provide operational data
needed to control the spacecraft. Normally, we convert telemetry measurements to
digital signals, serially multiplex them in a telemetry frame using a repetitive pattern,
and transmit the frame using a main frame word for frame synchronization. We may
use a main frame word as a subcommutated channel or we may supercommutate
signals if we need a sampling rate higher than the frame rate. Fmally, we may place
the telemetry frames in packets and multiplex them with other downlink data.
Commands and telemetry signals depend on the spacecraft's operation. Each of the
spacecraft's commandable functions needs a separate command. In addition, we must
provide enough telemetry to define the spacecraft's state of health, as well as data for
operational control.
Table 10-24 lists the steps to size the C&DH subsystem. In its simplest form. this
subsystem consists of a command decoder and a telemetry multiplexer. More complex systems distribute the command decoding function by routing serial commands
to user subsystems for final decoding. Telemetry multiplexing can also be distributed.
High-performance subsystems use central digital computers for ·data processing.
Table 10-25 presents typical characteristics. Chapter 11 describes more complex
subsystems.
10.4.5 Thermal Subsystem

The thermal design of a spacecraft involves identifying the sources of heat and
designing paths for transporting and rejecting heat, so components will stay within

..

331

Designing the Spacecraft Bus

10.4

TABLE 10-24. Steps In Sizing the Command and Data Handling Subsystem.
Whafs Involved

Step

Reference

Prepare
CommandUst

Prepare a complete list of commands for the payload and Sees.
10.4,11.3
each spacecraft bus subsystem. Include commands for
each redundancy option and each commandable operation.

Prepare
Telemetry Ust

Analyze spacecraft operation to select telemetry measure- Sees.
ment points that completely characterize it Include signals 10.4,11.3
to identify redundancy configuration and command receipt

Analyze TImIng

Analyze spacecraft operation to Identify time-critical
operations, and timeliness needed for telemetry data.

Sec. 10.3,
Chap. 16

Select Data Rates

Choose data rates that support command and telemetry
requirements and time-critical operations.

Sec. 13.3

Identify Processing Examine need for encryption, decryption, sequencing,
and processing of commands and telemetry.
Requirements

Sec. 11.3

Identify Storage
Requirement

Compare data rates of payload and spacecraft to the
communications subsystem's ability.
.

Sec. 11.3

Select
Equipment

Configure the subsystem and select components to meet
requirements.

Sec. 11.3

TABLE 10-25. Typlcel Characteristics of Basic Components for Command and Data
Handling.
Weight
(kg)

Power
(W)

Comments

Command Unit

5.0

5.4 standby
14 operating

Redundant unit, 9 user addresses capacity.
18,892 commands

Pulse Code
Modulation Encoder

5.5

5.5

Redundant unit, 250 or 1,000 bitsls
64 word, 8 bit frame
5 subcommutated channels

Component

required temperatures. The sources of heat include solar radiation, Earth-reflection
and infrared radiation, and electrical energy dissipated in the electrical compone~ts.
Conventional electronics operate at temperatures close to room temperature ~25 C)
and will tolerate temperature variations of about ±20 DC. Battery cells, part;icularly
nickel-cadmium cells are more sensitive to temperature than most electromcs. But
they can still stand te~perature ranges of 5 DC to 20 DC. W,e can .contro! the te~pera­
tures of compartments for conventional electronics by coating or insulating theIr outer
surfaces. We select these coatings to strike a balance between the heat absorbed and
the heat radiated to space. The coatings include v:moW;; paints an? tapes, and second
surface glass mirrors. The weight of such coatings IS almost mdepende~t of the
quantity of heat dissipated and seldom exceeds 4% of the spacecraft dry. weIght The
thermal coatings, particularly insulation, can. close. o~t compartment opemngs and may
also shield components from electromagnetic radiation. .
.. .
Components which have stringent temperature repnrements or which diSSIpate
large amounts of electrical power require more extensIve thermal control. For example, we usually place gyros and precision oscillators in insulated comp~ents, or
ovens, with active electrical heaters to control temperatures carefully. T~ve~~ w~ve
tubes and other elements which dissipate a lot of power concentrate thelT diSSIpation
locally and produce hot spots. Normally, we conduct heat away from such hot spots

332

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

10.4

and spread it over a thermal panel where it radiates to space. If the hot spots are less
than 50 W, we can simply increase the thickness of the mounting panel so it will carry
the heat away. But more intense hot spots and equipment that must meet tight thermal
limits usually require heat pipes to move the heat and thus equalize temperatures.
The process of thermal design for spacecraft proceeds as follows. The first step is
to identify heat sources and the location of radiating panels to dispose of excess heat
The heat sources include internal dissipation and external radiation from the Sun and
the Earth. Often, particular surfaces of the spacecraft are not exposed or only partially
exposed to the Sun or Earth. These faces are preferred locations for radiating panels
,and for components which dissipate large amounts of heat. The latter should be next
to the radiators. We can compute the total amount of radiating area from the staticheat-balance equation for the entire spacecraft. But a component's thermal performance.may differ markedly from the average.
Most power for thermal control goes to heaters that keep components from getting
too cold. Heaters also compensate for imperfections in insulation or heat leaks, and are
used to heat areas such as articulation joints that are difficult to insulate and dissipate
little heat internally. Heaters or heater-controlled heat pipes (see Sec. 11.5) offer very
tight control or control at a particular temperature value for certain components. A
typical medium-sized spacecraft (1,000 W) consumes 20 W in the thermal subsystem
plus any power required for special thermal control. In most cases, heaters can operate
from primary power.
10.4.6 Power Subsystem

The power subsystem generates power, conditions and regulates it, stores it for
periods of peak demand or eclipse operation, and distnbutes it throughout the spacecraft. The power subsystem may also need to convert and regulate voltage levels or
supply multiple voltage levels. It frequently switches equipment on or off and, for
increased reliability, protects against short circuits and isolates faults. Subsystem
design is also influenced by space radiation, which degrades the performance of solar
cells. Finally, battery life often limits the spacecraft's lifetime.
Earlier in this chapter, I described how to prepare a power budget for the spacecraft.
This budget includes most of the information we need to size the power subsystem: the
spacecraft's needs for operating power, storage requirements, and how the power
subsystem degrades over the spacecraft's lifetime. The remaining steps to size the
power subsystem are selecting a solar-array approach, sizing the array, sizing the
batteries and the components that control charging, and sizing the equipment for
distributing and converting power.
Solar arrays are generally planar, cylindrical, or omnidirectional. Planar arrays are
flat panels pointed toward the Sun. Their power output is proportional to the projection
of their area toward the incident sunlight. Three-axis-stabilized spacecraft normally
use planar arrays. Cylindrical arrays appear on spin-stabilized systems in which the
spin axis is perpendicular or nearly perpendicular to the Sun line. The output of a solarcell array is nearly proportional to the amount of solar energy intercepted, and the
projected area of a cylinder is lin times the total area. Thus, the cylindrical array
should have approximately n times as many cells as a planar array with the same
power rating. But temperature effects slightly favor the cylindrical array, so the actual
ratio is closer to la.5. If the spacecraft can receive sunlight from any aspect, then its
array must have equal projected area in all directions. In other words, it must have an
omnidirectional array. A sphere has this property, but paddles or cylinders combined

T

Designing the Spacecraft Bus

10.4

333

with planar panels are also possible. The total area of an omnidirectional array must
be approximately 4 times the projected area, so an omnidirectional array has about
4 times the area of a planar array with the same power rating.
The required area of a planar solar array is related to the required power, P, the solar
constant (1,367 W/m2), and the conversion efficiency of the solar-cell system.
Although cells have had efficiencies as high as 30%, practical array designs range
from 5% to 15% when taking into account the operating conditions and degradation at
end-of-life. An array with an efficiency of 7% would have a required area of
-_P_0.07 x 1367

=O.OIP

(10-12)

where Aa is in m2 and P is in watts. This area is characteristic of current arrays. The
mass of a planar array with specific performance of 25 W/kg is
.
Ma

=0.04 P

(10-13)

where Ma is in kg and P in watts. Current designs range from 14 to 47 W/kg at
end-of-life. The high end would provide 66 W/kg at beginning-of-life. Solar arrays
mounted on the spacecraft's body usually weigh less than planar arrays.
Rechargeable nickel-cadmium or nickel-hydrogen batteries are the usual devices
for energy storage for unmanned spacecraft. They are available in various sizes and
are highly reliable even though their performance characteristics are quite complex.
The battery often represents one of the most massive components in the spacecraft. It
also is very sensitive to temperature and to the use proflle. Nickel-cadmium, and to a
lesser extent nickel-hydrogen batteries perform best when operated between 5 °c and
20 °C. This range is both lower and more restricted than the temperature requirements
for most electronic components. The battery also has complex wear-out mechanisms,
thus limiting cycle life as a function of depth-of-discharge. Other variables-temperature, rate of charge, rate of discharge, and degree of overcharge-also affect cycle life
but in a less well-defined way. If a battery has shallow discharge cycles, itloses capacity. To counter this tendency, most spacecraft recondition their batteries from time to
time by discharging them completely.
We determine a battery's capacity from the energy it must produce (discharge
power times discharge duration) and from its depth-of-discharge. We select.the
battery's depth-of-discharge to meet cycle life requirements. Table 10-26 gives guidelines on depths-of-discharge for nickel-cadmium and nickel-hydrogen batteries.
Section 11.4 discusses these concepts in more detail.
TABLE 10-26. Allowed Battery Depth-of-Dlscharge vs. Cycle

ute.

Battery Type

Depth of Discharge

Less than 1,000 cycles

NICd
NiH2

80%
100%

10,000 cycles

NICd

30%
50%

CycleUfe

N~

To compute a battery's capacity, we divide the discharge energy (watt-hours) by
the depth-of-discharge. The ratio of battery weight to battery capacity is 30 to
40 W'hr/kg for NiCd batteries and 35 to 50 W·hr/kg for NiH2 .0ften, several batteries

334

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

10.4

oJX!l1lte in parallel to provide the needed capacity. By using several small batteries
can add some redundant batteries for backup with less weight penalty than for a sec';~
large battery.
Spacecraft primary powe~wer produced by the solar array and batterie8-'-js
not w~ll regulated (28 ± 5 V is typical). Furthermore, we must match the solar array'
electrical output to the battery's charging requirements and provide switching equi s
me~t that allows the battery to supply power when needed. Section 11.4 descrit!;
vanous way~ t~ ?teet these needs. Significant features include limiting the batte's
~harge rate, l_~tin~ overcharge, providing for low-impedance discharge, and pro~d­
lDg for reconditionlDg: The controller or regulator must cope with the voltage swings
between charge and discharge. The power control unit must isolate faults and switch
to red~dant units while also serving as the center of the power distribution network
.
An estimate of the power control unit's weight is 0.02 kgIW of controlled power
Most el~nic .equipment, for both the payload and the spacecraft,
v?ltage regulation ti~ter than that provided by the arrays and batteries. We must
eIther regul~ the ~ power or convert it to secondary power, which we can regulate more tightly. In eIther case, power dissipates in the regulator or the wer
converters. This dissipation typically amounts to 20% of the power converted, ;:hich
may be all of ~e spacecraft's ?perating power. In sizing the power subsystem, we
must therefore lDclude the weIght of the power conversion equipment-..hn-.icall
0.025 kgIW converted.
• OJ}'
Y

recPmes

Th~ po~er subsyste?l includes wiring for distribution and may have com nents
for ~W1tchi~g and fault ISolation. The power dissipated in wiring losses and s~hin
eqwpment IS 2% to 5% of the operating power, and the wiring harness takes up 1% t~
4% .of the spacecraft ~ weight. Spacecraft which must operate in high radiation
envlro?Ments may reqwre shielded wire to distribute power. Table 10-27 summarizes
the weIght and power requirements of the power subsystem.
TABLE 10-27. WeIght and Power Budget for Power Subsystem. P= required power In watts
Note that Mdlyls used here as In Table 10-10.
.
Component
SolarAnays
Batteries

WeIght (kg)

CI35 (NiCd)
C/45(NIH~

. Power Control Unit

Power(W)

O.04P

O.02P

Regulator/Converters 0.025P
Wiring
0.01-0.04 MdIy

Comments
x 7t for cylindrical body-mounted
x 4 for omnidirectional body mounted

-

-

C= capacity In W·hrs
P = controlled power

02P

P = converted power

O.02-o.05P

Mdry = spacecraft dry weight

Primary power is distributed in most unmanned spacecraft as low-voltage direct

~urrent. But ~or ~y~ms with power needs above 10 kW, we should consider alternat-

mg c~~t distribution, both sine wave and square wave, at several hundred volts
RadIOISotope thermoelectric lI,enerators (RTGs) have been designed for vari~us
pow~ levels b~t .have been appbed only to low-power needs. In practice, the units
cons!st of a radiOIsotope heat source which can produce power by thermoelectrlcs or
P~V1de thermal energy to a rotating generator. If we use one of these units we must
dispose of excess heat during all mission phases and particularly duri~g launch

10.4

Designing the Spacecraft Bus

335

preparation and boost. We must also consider safety issues, but RTG sources are
probably safer than most propellants. The design must ensure that the generator
remains intact and shielded even during catastrophic launch failure.
Using rotating machines to generate primary power is another design with
potential. Closed-cycle, thermal engines should be nearly twice as efficient as solar
cells, and rotating generators can provide sine-wave AC power with better regulation
than solar-cell designs.

10.4.7 Structures and Mechanisms
The spacecraft structure carries and protects the spacecraft and payload equipment
through the launch environment and deploys the spacecraft after orbit injection. The
load-carrying structure of a spacecraft is primary structure, whereas brackets, closoout
panels, and most deployable components are secondary structure.
We size primary structure based on the launch loads, with strength and stiffness
dominating its design. The size of secondary structure depends on on-orbit factors
rather than boost-phase loads. Secondary structure only has to survive but not function
during boost, and we can usually cage and protect deployables throughout this phase.
Each of the launch boosters provides maximum acceleration levels to be used f()r
design (see Chap. 18). These acceleration levels or load factors are typically 6 g's
maximum axial acceleration and 3 g's maximum lateral acceleration. These levels
work for conceptual design, but some designers prefer to increase them by as much as
50% during early design phases. During preliminary sizing, we must remember that
the primary structure must carry some weight, such as kick motors and propellant,
which will drop away before orbit injection. Section 11.6 discusses structural design
and presents methods for preliminary structural sizing.
We use cylindrical and conical shell structures and trusses for primary structure,
commonly building them out of aluminum and magnesium with titanium for end
fittings and high-strength attachments. Composite materials have seen limited use in
primary structure to date but they will become more common. We can size primary
structure by modeling it as a cylindrical beam which is mass loaded by its own weigbt
and the spacecraft's components. The lateral load factors applied· to this beam produce
a moment that is a function of axial location. Compression in the extreme section ()f
the beam carries the moment. By adding the axial load to the moment-induced,
compressive .load, we can estimate the critical load, which in tum sizes the primary
structure (see Eq. 11-42). In these preliminary sizing calculations, we can exercise
much license in assuming symmetry and in simplifying the loads. We can iterate the
skin gage to withstand stress levels and check the tubular design for buckling (see
Sec. 11.6.6).
We use a similar approach to size a truss-based primary structure. We reduce the
truss to its simplest form by successively removing redundant members until we reach
a statically determinant structure. Simply combining loading conditions allows us to
size the truss members.
We must also locate and mount components on the basic, load-carrying cylinder or
truss. Most electronic components have rectangular symmetry and are mounted with
lugs or bosses integral to their housings. Mounting requirements include loads, good
thermal contact with the mounting surface, and good electrical contact. Aluminum
honeycomb is an excellent mount for components. It attaches to longeron-stringer
frames to fonn a semi-monocoque Ooad-carrying skin) structure. Honeycomb sheets
with composite faces occasionally substitute for other approaches.

336

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

10.5

Some components are not rectangular. For example, propellant tanks are normally
spherical but may be elongated, have conical sections, or be toroidal. Electromechanical drives and reaction wheels are cylindrical, and control moment gyros are complex.
These components include mounting provisions in their designs. Generally they have
flanges, bosses, or lUgs. In most cases, and particularly in the case of tanks and pres_
sure vessels, the mounting must avoid loading the component To do so, the mount
must be statically determinant, and component loads from deflection of the mount
must be minimal.
Other components of complex geometric shape, such as thrusters and connectors,
may mount through brackets specifically tailored to them. Hinges and similar items are
machined fittings with integral flanges or mounting bosses. We can align components
by shimming, but we must be careful not to disturb thermal and electrical bonds.
A set of data on spacecraft subsystem mass is presented in Appendix A. These data
show the structural mass to be approximately 20% of the spacecraft total. However
these data do not include all of the injected mass (apogee kick motors carried in the
spacecraft are not included). Therefore one should be careful about using these data
for estimating new designs. However, structural mass of 10% to 20% of spacecraft dry
mass is a reasonable starting point
We must have an interstage structure to mount the spacecraft to the booster. This
structure conforms to the booster provisions for mounting and carries loads during .the
boost phase. Both truss structures and conical adapters are common. Because this
structure is designed for strength under high loads, it is an excellent candidate for
high-strength materials and weight-efficient design. The spacecraft usually provides
this interstage structure and incorporates a separation joint to release the spacecraft at
orbit
Common methods of attachment at the separation plane are marmon clamps or
separation bolts. In the marmon clamp, the separation joint is a continuous ring held
together by an annular clamp. Release of clamp tension allows the joint to separate. In
the case of separation bolts, the joint is held by several bolts which are released by
either severing the bolt or by releasing a nut. Once the separation joint is free, springs
impart a small velocity increment to the spacecraft. After separation, the booster
maneuvers to avoid accidental impact For spin-stabilized spacecraft, the interstage
structure may incorporate a mechanism to impart spin while ejecting the spacecraft.
The Shuttle interfaces differently from the expendable boosters. It links with its
payloads at a series of hard points located along the sill of the cargo bay and along the
cargo bay's centerline (keel fittings). The payload and its upper stages usually require
a cradle or fittings to translate the loads into these hard points. Mechanisms for deploying the spacecraft may be spring-powered or motor-driven. Chapter 11 presents
weight-estimating relations for motor-driven mechanisms. Spring-powered mechanisms must meet stiffness requirements, but they weigh about half as much as their
motor-driven equivalents.

10.5 Integrating the Spacecraft Design
10.5.1 Spacecraft Size
If we know the spacecraft's weight and power, we can estimate its size. Most space-

craft have a main body or equipment compartment Many also have solar panels which
wrap around the compartment for launch and deploy outside the compartment on orbit.

T

Integrating the Spacecraft Design

10.5

337

Table 10-28 gives estimating relations based on analysis of the volume and dimensions of a number of spacecraft. These spacecraft ranged from 135 kg to 3,625 kg and
represent about 15% of the U.S. spacecraft launched' between 1978 and 1984 [TRW
Defense and Space Systems Group, 1980-1985]. Their density ranged from 20 kg/m3
to 172 kg/m3, with an average of 79 kg/m3• The spacecraft w~ all CYlindri~y
ymmetric although the cross section varied from rectangular to ctrCular. The ratio of
~ase diam~ter to cube root of mass ranged from 0.16 m/kg1/3 to 0.31 m/kg1/3, with an
average of 0.23 m/kg l/3. The ratio of spacecraft height to cube root of mass ranged
from 0.13 to 0.83, with an average of 0.39 m/kg 1/3.
TABLE 10-28. Rules for EstimaUng Volume" DImensIon, Area, and Moments of InerUa.
M == spacecraft loaded mass in kg as defined in Table 10-10.
Range

Volume (m3)

Estimate
V-0.01 M

0.005 to 0.05

Unear Dimension (m)

s=0.25 MlI3

0.15 to 0.30

Body Area (m2)
Moment of Inertia (kg. m2)

Ab=s2

Characteristic

1= 0.01 M513

-

Section 10.4.6 presented relations for estimating the area of a solar array. Sometimes, the required array area is smaller than the ~pacecraft's body area, and the body
can be oriented properly relative to the Sun. In this case, we can mount the solar cells
directly on the body. But high-power spacecraft usually mo~t the solar ~lls on
external panels either off to one side or symmetrically on both Sides of the eqwpment
compartment. External solar arrays greatly increase the spacecraft's moment of
inertia, particularly about the axes perpendicular ~o the array axis. Suppose the solar
array consists of two square panels, one on each Side of the spacecraft, an~ the cen~r
of each ()f these panels is La meters from the body's ce~ter. If so, the m~ m
moment of inertia is approximately La2Ma, where Ma IS the solar array weight
Table 10-29 gives an approximate expressi~n for La in ~ ~fthe ~y area and the
body dimension, s. It shows the solar array s moment of mertia relative to the spacecraft's center. External solar arrays also affect the total projected spacecraft area,
which in turn influences aerodynamic drag and solar-radiation pressure. Table 10-29
summarizes estimating rules for solar-array moment of inertia and area offset Aa is the
total solar array area. We must add these inertias to the inertias of the central compartment, assuming the latter to be equal to the values for the folded spacecraft computed
above.
TABLE 10-29. Rules for EstimaUng Area Offset and Moment of Inertia of a Solar Array.
These should be added to the body values computed in Table 10-28. See text for
definition of terms.
Solar Array Area Offset (m)

La = 1.5s+ 0.5 (Aa/2)112

Solar Array Moment of Inertia (kg ?m2)
Perpendicular to Array Axis

'ax = (La2+Aa/12) Ma
lay = (La2 + Aa I 24) Ma

About Array Axis

laa=(Aal 24) Ma

Perpendicular to Array Face

338

Spacecraft Design ami Sizing

10.5

10.5.2 Lifetime and Reliability

Reliability is a parameter under the designer's control. We should consider its
potential effect on spacecraft sizing during conceptual design by examining failures
from wear-out and random causes. In other words, we should identify the ways in
which the spacecraft may fail and tailor the design to eIiminate or limit failures to
acceptable levels. This implies identifying components or functions which can wear
out and designing the system so that they meet the mission's lifetime requirements.
Propellant supply and battery-cycle life are examples of these components. If equipment does not wear out, we must evaluate how each part's failure affects the mission
and modify the design to eliminate any single-point failures. Then, we use statistics to
compute the probability of mission success and tailor the design to acceptable levels.
This process is not exact, but careful attention to reliability gives us the most balanced
and able system possible.
To design for reliability, we must understand what constitutes success. The more
specifically and numerically we can state the success criteria, the easier we can translate these criteria into design requirements. After defining success, we should list the
smallest amount of equipment or number of functions that will provide it. We can
begin by placing these functions in a signal flow or block diagram. In this basic form,
~ost functions involve only one path or set of equipment. For this reason, we sometim~ call it a single-string reliability model. Later in the design process, we can add
multiple paths or backup modes to improve the probability of success, taking care to
understand both the reliability enhancement and the cost.
By understanding the functions needed for a successful mission, we understand the
factors which limit mission life or threaten that success. Often a new mission depends
on developing or exploiting new technology, so we need to know the technology and
the factors that stress the components of our system. By reducing our knowledge to a
set of specifications and applying the stresses to our design, we improve our ability to
produce reliable hardware.
One of the key steps in design for reliability is to numerically predict the probability
of success. To do so, we must differentiate failures from wear-out and failures from
random causes. Classic reliability models depict the rate of failure when plotted
against time as a "bathtub"-shaped curve. Early on, systems fail at high rates because
of infant monality; late in life, they fail because of wear-out. We can eliminate failures
from infant mortality with careful construction, testing, and bum-in. We can avoid
wear-out by understanding and eIiminating the factors that cause it or by providing
enough hardware to replace worn-out equipment. Between the extremes of infant
mortality and wear-out, the failure rate is more or less uniform and attributed to
random effects.
Wear-out shortens a mission. Random failures kill a spacecraft with accumulated
effects. A successful design copes with them by providing enough backup components
to cover them. Because we cannot determine when they will occur, our design must
allow us to detect and correct them. Also, a good design tolerates some failures and
remains useful in a degraded mode.
Searching for and identifying the ways in which equipment can fail is a basic part
of desi~ for reliability. This process, called Failure Modes Effects and Criticality
Analyszs (FMECA) assumes that we can identify the ways in which equipment can fail
~d analyze the effect. Key to this process is identifying and eIiminating single-point
failure modes--failures that by themselves can kill the mission. If we cannot eliminate
them, we must control their probability of occurrence.

10.6

Examples

339

We can analyze the failure modes of our equipment in several ways. For example,
the all-part method simply analyzes each of the spacecraft's parts to determine the
effect of its failure. On a large spacecraft this method is a lot of work but is straightforward and easy to do. The all-~art melh;od requires us t? an.alyze shorts and opens
_systematically searching for wtreS or pnnted traces on cm:wt boards that can cause
failure if opened or shorted together. We can ~so use scenarios to find potential ~ailure
modes. To do so, we simulate the spacecraft s launch, deployment, and operation to
ensure that telemetry can detect failures and that th~ command system can. correct
them. This simulation normally occurs when operational procedures are bemg prepared. but it can more effectively detect design flaws if done earlier.
Another way to identify failure modes is the jury method. In many cases. new
designs do not have a lot of experience behind them, but people ha~e had ~xpen~ce
with similar equipment. We can poll them as part of a formal design reView or m a
separate meeting, thus using their experience to identify likely failure modes and
probable effects.

10.6 Examples
In this section, we discuss three examples of spacecraft sizing. First we develop a
preliminary estimate of the FJreSat spacecraft and then review two actual systems
-FLTSATCOM and HEAO-B.
The drivers for the FJreSat spacecraft design are the Fm:Sat payload design
(Sec. 9-7, Table 9-15) and the orbit and ~V req~ments (Table 7-3~. We will use
these to get a broad estimate of the overall SIZe, weight, and power for FJreSat and then
to break this down into approximate subsystem allocations. The results of the top-level
process are summarized in Table 10-30. Keep in ~d that these are .crude estimates
that allow us to begin the process of spacecraft design. We must continually evaluate
and refme the requirements and resulting design and perform a variety of system trades
to arrive at an acceptable, consistent design.
Our first estimate of the spacecraft mass and power come directly from the payl~
estimates of Sec. 9-7 (Table 9-15). As given in Table 10-5, the payload mass IS
between 17% and 50% of the spacecraft dry weight with an average of 30% (see also
Appendix A). We know very little about FJreSat at this time, so we will add margin by
estimating the payload at 20% of the spacecraft ~, we~ belo,:"" ~e a~erage percentage. However, FireSat was scaled down from a flight umt. This IDIplies that the bus
will probably be a larger fraction of the spacecraft dry weight:
know!edge of the
weight is poor at this time because we have not yet done a preliminary weight budget.
When we allocate the mass to subsystems below we will hold the margin at the system
level to allow us to apply it as needed to various subsystems.
Similarly, our initial power estimate is based on the payload power of 32 W and the
estimate from Table 10-9 that for moderate size spacecraft, the payload represents
40% of the spacecraft power. Our spacecraft is small with significant control and
processing requirements. Therefore, we will again be conservative and assume that the
payload represents only 30% of the power requirement for FireSat Here the knowledge is very poor, because we have not yet budgeted the power and have not
determined what payload duty cycle should be used-tbat is, should we tum the payload off over the poles and oceans? Because we will have to contend with eclipses
(Sec. 5.1, Example I), the solar array output will be estimated at 170 W to provide
110 W to the spacecraft which then provides 32 W to the payload.

o.ur

340

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

10.6

TABLE 10-30. PreDmlnary EstImate of RreSat Spacecraft Parameters. See text for discussion. These parameters are based primarily on the payload parameters defined
In Sec. 9.6.

Parameter

FlreSat EstImate

Notes and References

Payload:
Mass
Power

28 kg
32W

Table 9-15
Table 9-15

140 kg
110W
170W
Body-mounted omnl array,
1.7 m2 facing the Sun
(8.5 m2 total area)
3-axis, nadir pointed

Payload mass/O.2; Text + Table 10-5
Payload power/0.3; Text + Table 10-9
Eclipse aDowance, Eq. (11-1)
Sec. 10.4.6, array on 5 non-nadir

Spacecraft:
Dry mass
Average power
SoJar array power
Solar array design

Control approach

faces
Sec. 10.4.2

Propellant

AV
Attitude control + residual
Margin
Total propellant
Propulsion approach

Spacecraft Loaded Mass:

28 kg
2kg
4kg
34 kg
Metered bipropellant
(Isp 300 s); no kick stage

7%; Sees. 10.4.2, 11.1
15%; Table 10-7
Sum of the above
Text

175 kg

Dry mass + propellant

=

Table 7-3; Eq. (17-7)

Volume
Unear dimensions
Body cross-sectional

area
Moment of Inertia

1.7m3
1.4m

dry mass or as a percentage of the payload mass. Column (I) lists the average percentage of spacecraft dry mass devoted tp each subsystem based on the historical data for
spacecraft listed in Appendix A. The resulting mass distribution and margin are shown

in column (3). Column (2) lists the same data expressed as the average percentage of
payload mass devoted to each subsystem. The resulting FrreSat mass distribution is
shown in column (4). We recommend using the mass'distribution shown in column
(4). A weight margin of at least 25% at this stage of development is appropriate. The
column (3) approach resulted in a "margin" of only 11.2 kg or 8% of the spacecraft
dry mass. This approach prematurely divides the available margin among the
subsystems. We recommend maintaining the margin at the system level and then allocating it to the payload or other subsystems as necessary throughout the development
TABLE 10-31. Preliminary RreSat Spacecraft Weight Budget.

Etementof
. Weight
Budget

Table 10-28

2.0m2

Table 10-28
Table 10-28

5Okg·m2

Table 10-28

In Sec. 7.5.1, we decided to try eliminating a kick stage and flying the spacecraft
up using low-thrust chemical propulsion. In order to maintain reasonable efficiency,
we initially assume a metered bipropellant system with an Isp of 300 s (Sec. 10.4.1,
Chap. 17). Using the rocket equation (Eq. 17-7), we can compute the propellant mass
as 28 kg and then add small amounts for attitude control and margin as given in
Table 10-30. Here our knowledge of the propellant mass as a fraction of the spacecraft
mass is good, although the spacecraft mass itself is not yet well known. Because the
propellant mass is small, we may choose later to go to a simpler monopropellant
system or to have the launch vehicle put FrreSat directly into its end orbit.
Given an approximate mass for the whole system we can estimate the size and
moments of inertia from Table 10-28. This, in tmn, can tell us something about the
solar array configuration. We estimate the body area at 2.0 m2 and the required solar
array area at 1.7 m2. So we can probably avoid solar panels altogether and use an
omnidirectional array consisting of solar cells mounted on the non-nadir facing sides
of the body. This will be compact, economical, and easy to control.
.
Fmally, Table 10-31 presents two ways of developing a preliminary weight budget
for FireSat We can estimate the mass of each subsystem as a percentage of spacecraft

(1)"
(2)t
Est. %of Est.%of
Spacecraft Payload
Mass
Dry Mass

(3)
(4)
Est. Mass Est. Mass
Based on Based on
Col. (1)
Col. (2)
(kg)
(kg)

Payload

20.0

100.0

28.0

2B.0

Structuras

21.0

75.0

29.4

21.0

Thermal

Spacecraft Size
and Moments:

341

Examples

10.6

4.5

16.1

6.3

4.5

Power

30.0

107.1

42.0

30.0

Comments
Payload mass estimate
from Table 10-30

TT&C

4.5

16.1

6.3

4.5

Att. Control

6.0

21.4

8.4

6.0

Prop (dry)

6.0

21.4

8.4

6.0

Margin (kg)

-

-

11.2

40.0

Spacecraft Dry
Mass (kg)

-

-

140.0

140.0

Estimate from
Table 10-30

Propellant
Mass (kg)

-

-

35.0

35.0

Estimate from
Table 10-30

Spacecraft
Loaded Mass (kg)

-

-

175.0

175.0

Sum of spacecraft dry
mass & propellant mass

Margin as %
of Dry Mass

-

-

8.O"k

28.6%

Margin/ (Spacecraft
dry mass) x 100"/0

Note that using the
approach In Col. (4) the
margin is maintained at
the system level, not the
subsystem level

• The percentages In Column (1) are the average values listed In Appendix A.
tThe percentages In Column (2) are the average payload values listed In Appendix A.

To provide more detailed examples of spacecraft design, we'll look at two actual
spacecr:aft--.FLTSATCOM [Reeves, 1979] and HEAD-B [Frazier, 1981] and use our
estimating techniques to describe them. Figure 10-3 shows the basic configuration of
these spacecraft and their principal mission parameters.
Table 10-32 summarizes the design requirements for FLTSATCOM and HEAD-B.
FLTSATCOM is a communications spacecraft that is part of a global network

342

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

10.6

343

Examples

10.6

TABLE 10-32. FLTSATCOM and HEAQ-B Requirements and Constraints (See Table 111-3).
'spacecraft

EnvironMission

FLTSAT- Global
UHF
COM
communlcations

HEAO-B X-ray

Payload

FLTSATCOM

HEAQ-B

Military communications

X-ray astronomy

Payload

Communication transponders
and antennas

X-ray telescope and Instruments

Size

4.9 m transmit antenna
3.10 m heUcaJ receive antenna
2.4 m hexagonal x 1 m dgep
electronics compartment

2.3 m octagonal x 4.7 m
Instrument compartment

3,154 kg

Wt. (load9d)

927 kg

Power

1,224 W

619W

POinting

0.25 deg accuracy

Telescope axis anywhere
1 arcmln accuracy
30 arcSec stability in 1 hr
10 deg/mln slew rate

Data Rate
(selectable)

1 kbpsl250 bps

6.4 kbpsl128 kbps
84 Mb data storage capability

Orbit

Geosynchronous, 2.5 deg incnned

540 km circular, 22.75 deg inclined

Reliability

0.267 at 5 yrs

0.81 at 1 yr

Rg.l11-3. Mission Parameters for FLTSATCOM and HEAQ-B. Nota that loaded weight Is
mass In kg; this use continues throughout the example.

providing UHF communications between ground stations and mobile users. The
communications payload equipment consists of receivers, processors, transmitters,
and antennas. Its mission of global communications requires full-Earth antenna
coverage. The antennas are body-fixed and oriented to point toward nadir. The orbit
has a 24-hour period (geosynchronous) and initially is inclined 25 deg to the equator.
There is no active inclination control. The launch vehicle is an Atlas-Centaur to inject
the spacecraft into an elliptic transfer orbit At apogee, a solid kick motor injects the
spacecraft into geosynchronous orbit The spacecraft uses the Air Force Satellite
Control Network for command and control.
. The mission of HEAO-B was X-ray astronomy. Its payload consisted of 5 X-ray
Instruments mounted within a telescope assembly. The mission required the telescope

Launch
System

Communications 24-hrclrcular Atias-Centaur AtIastransponder &
inclined
launch;
Centaur
2.5deg
antennas
5yrsinGEO With solid
apogee
kick motor

X-ray telescope
astronomy & Instruments

Mission

ment

Orbit

540km
circular
inclined
22.75deg

Atias-Centaur AtIaslaunch; 12 mo Centaur
In LEO

Ground
System
Air Force
Saterute
Control
Network
(SGLS)

NASA
S-band
GSTDN
network

to be pointed anywhere and stabilized to 1 arcmin accuracy, with 30 arcsec stability
over one hour. A slew rate of 10 deg/min was required. The orbit was circular at
540 km altitude inclined at 22.75 deg. HEAO-B was launched on an Atlas-Centaur in
late 1978 and had a design life of one year. It interfaced with NASA's GSTDN S-band
ground network.
Table 10-33 presents the key design decisions for configuring the two spacecraft.
Weight dominated the FLTSATCOM design. The payload was large and complex,
and mission-reliability goals required complete payload redundancy. The AtlasCentaur's launch capability limited the weight, thus requiring tight weight control.
Because the FLTSATCOM payload required over 1,000 W, designers selected an
oriented planar solar array. The Atlas-Centaur's fairing diameter also limited the
spacecraft's folded size. The spacecraft employs two attitude-control modes: spin
stabilization for orbit injection and 3-axis stabilization for on-orbit ,control. All
communication components are body-fixed, and the body is controlled to point the
antennas toward nadir. A planar solar array is articulated about one axis to poin t
toward the Sun. Liquid-hydrazine propulsion provides attitude and orbit control; a
solid apogee kick motor injected the spacecraft into orbit.
TABLE 10-33.

Initial Design Decisions for FLTSATCOM and HEAQ-B (See Table 10-4).

Design Aspect

FLTSATCOM Design Approach

HEAQ-B Design Approach

Spacecraft Weight
and Power

Dominated by heavy weight and
Large margins established
high-power payload; constrained by InltiaUy; not tightly constrained by
booster capability
booster capabilUy

Spacecraft Size

Folded configuration nmlted by
fairing; deployed configuration
dominated by antenna size and
solar array area

Folded configuration Umlted by
fairing diameter; large
deployables not required

Attitude Control
Approach

Spin stabilization for kick motor
firing; 3-axIs control on orbU

3-axis control used to provide
precision

Solar Array Approach Planar-oriented array

Planar body-fixed array

Kick Stage Use

Solid AKM used for orbit Insertion

Not required

Propulsion Approach

Uquld hydrazJne thrusters used for
attitudel

Orbit Control

. Uquld hydrazine thrusters used for
attitude control

344

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

10.6

Weight did not dominate the design for HEAO-B. Its payload instruments existed
before the program developed the spacecraft to cany them. The program was able to
establish large weight and power margins. The fairing diameter affected the spacecraft's size, but the instruments fit within this diameter. Power requirements were
modest and a planar body-fixed array was used. The spacecraft mjssion required
precision pointing of the payload, which led to 3-axis attitude control USing
gyroscopes, star sensors, and reaction wheels. Kick-stage propulsion was not required.
Hydrazine monopropellant propulsion was used for attitude control.
Derign Budgets
Table 10-34 presents the propellant budget, velocity increments, specific impulse,
and spacecraft mass for FLTSATCOM. To derive the velocity required to insert the
spacecraft into its final orbit, the designers used the methods in Chap. 7. That chapter
also describes injection-error analysis which the designers used to derive the velocity
increment that corrected the orbit The ratio of this error to the AKM velocity (0.5%)
is typical of current performance for solid motors. The stationkeeping velocity derives
from analysis of orbit perturbations over the spacecraft's design life. The stationkeeping increment developed from an operational requirement to move the spacecraft at a
rate of 15 deg longitude per day. During orbit injection FLTSATCOM spin-stabilized
at 60 rpm and maneuvered through an angle of 65 deg while spinning. Eqs. (10-7) and
(10-9) translate these requirements into propellant weight During its lifetime the
spacecraft uses propellant for attitude control, mainly to counter solar radiation
pressure. HEAO-B needed propellant only to acquire attitude and to cancel disturbance torques (principally aerodynamics and gravity gradient; see Table 10-18). The
propellant's mass was 138 kg.
TABLE 10-34. Propellant Budget for FLTSATCOM (See Table 10-4).
Element

Mass (kg)

Velocity Co"ection and Control
Orbit Insertion (AKM)

855.0

Guidance error correction
Stalionkeeplng
Station change
Attitude Control

4.1
6.5
52.7

Spinup and despln

6.0

Maneuvering whOe spinning

3.3

Attitude control

8.4

Residual
Total Propellant
Sond
liquid

Design CharacterisUcs

=1,748.8 m/s; Isp= 285.5 s
9.0 m/s; Isp =215.2 s; MS/c =988 kg

Examples

10.6

support the full operating power during the maximum eclipse of 1.2 hours. The batteries operated at a maximum depth of discharge of 70% and required a recharge
power of 167 W. Designers sized the array for a beginning-of-life power of 1,800 W.
TABLE 10-35. Power Budgets for FLTSATCOM and HEAQ-B (See Tables 10-&, 10-7, and
10-&).

-

Subsystem

FLTSATCOM
Power Budget
(W)

HEAQ-B
Power Budget
Cruise Mode
(W)

HEAQ-B
Power Budget
. Ground Pass
(W)

1,070'

217.0

217.0

Payload
Spacecraft Bus
propulsion
Attitude Control
Communications
Data Handling
Thermal
Electric Power
Operating Power
Orbital Average Power
Battery Recharge Power
End-of-Ufe Power
8eginning-of-Ufe Power

=60 rpm; SIC inertia =995 kg.m2
Maneuver angle =65 deg; Inertia = 917 kg·m2
Isp= 100 s; lever arm =1.25 m
Spin speed

1.5
855.0

82.5

Tables 10-35 and 10-36 present the power and weight budgets for FLTSATCOM
and HEAO-B. HEAO-B had two normal power modes: cruise and ground pass. The
table shows power requirements for both modes, together with the orbital average. The
batteries were sized for 20% depth of discharge because the mission life exceeded
5,000 discharge cycles. For FLTSATCOM, payload power, including noted power
conversion losses, is the main entry. The FLTSATCOM battery was large enough to

40
33t

9*

17.4

17.4

201.0

201.0

13.4

78.4

-

33.8

41.6

17

30.2

30.2

56
1,224

26.0

33.7

538.8

619.3

-

546.8

167

244.0

1,391
1,800

• Includes 192 W power conversion losses.
t Includes guidance and navigation functions.
:j: Combined communication and command and data handling.

TABLE 10-36. Weight Budgets for HEAQ-B and FLTSATCOM (see Table 10-9).

AV

14.2 m/s
115.2 m/s

345

Subsystem
Payload
Spacecraft Bus
Propulsion
Attitude Control
Communications
Command and data handling
Thermal
Electric power

FLTSATCOM
Weight Budget
(kg)

Structure

Spacecraft Dry Weight
Propellant .
Ballast
Loaded Weight
Apogee Kick Motor
Injected Weight
Adapter
Boosted Weight
• Combined communication and command and data handling.

HEAQ-B
Weight Budget
(kg)

222.0

1468.0

29.5
57.7
26.S'

25.5
124.0
30.0
41.6
35.4
376.0
779.0

-

14.5
336.0
154.0
841.0
85.4t

927.0
916.0
1844.0
19.5
1863.0

2868.2
138.0
148.0
3154.2

18.1
3172.3

t Includes 2.8 kg presswanl

346

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

10.6

Subsystem Design

Table 10-37 shows characteristics of the propulsion subsystems for the example
spacecraft. Each subsystem uses liquid-hydrazine propellant stored in two tanks. The
tanks are pressurized with a fixed amount of nitrogen gas, so the hydrazine pressure
~ecays as propellant bums. The tanks can cross connect through commandable isolation valves. Thrusters and propellant plumbing are redundant and able to cross
connect. HEAD-B used twelve 4.4-N thrusters mounted in six dual-thruster assemblies. FLTSATCOM uses sixteen 4.4-N thrusters and four O.44-N thrusters mounted
in dual-thruster assemblies.
TABLE 10-37. Characteristics of FLTSATCOM and HEAQ-S PropulsIon Subsystems.
Characteristic

PropeUant
Capacity
Tankage
Pressurant
Tank weight

Unes and Valves
Weight

Thrusters
Power Consumption
Weight

FLTSATCOM

HEAQ-S

Hydrazlne monoprop.
83 kg
Two 0.6 m diameter tltanIum
2.8 kg nitrogen
14.4 kg

Two 0.74 m diameter titanium
3.6 kg nitrogen
13.3 kg

Central Isolation valve dlstnbutlon
assembly.

Central propeDant distribution
module

7.5 kg

6.8 kg

Hydrazlne monoprop.
136.4 kg

Sixteen 4.4 N (4 ron, 4 pitch, 8 yaw and Twelve4.4N
LW) Four 0.44 N (roll·yaw)
(4 pitch, 8 roll-yaw)
40 W (catalyst bed and One heaters)
17.4W
7.6 kg
5.5 kg

Table 10-38 summarizes the attitude-control requirements for the two example
spacecraft (see Table 10-13). FLTSATCOM employs body-mounted antennas for its
payload and orients one body face to point the antennas toward nadir. FLTSATCOM
al~ h~ a planar so~ar array which it orients toward the Sun by combining body
one~tation and rotation o.f the array axis. Fmally, FLTSATCOM has a guidance
reqwrement for AV corrections. HEAD-B was required to point anywhere except close
to ~e Sun and hold accurate pointing for long periods. It also had modest power
reqwrements and no requirement for orbit correction.

Examples

10.6

347

Both FLTSATCOM and HEAO-B are 3-axis-controlled spacecraft. Both spacecraft had body-mounted payloads and controlled the body's attitude to point the
payloads (see Table 10-13). Both spacecraft use one axis of body attitude control to
orient a planar solar array toward the Sun. FLTSATCOM, which requires more than
1 kW of electric power, orients the array about a second axis.
FLTSATCOM employs a solid apogee kick motor to inject it into orbit Attitude is
controlled during AKM firing by spin stabilization (see Tables 10-14 and 10-15). The
spin direction can be rotated by using an off-axis thruster; the thruster fires pulses synchronized with the spin period. During nonnaI opemtion and AV firing, FLTSATCOM
is 3-axis stabilized. It uses Earth and Sun sensors for attitude sensing and thrusters and
a reaction wheel for torque. HEAD-B did not have a AV mode. Under nonnaI
operation, it used gyroscopes and Sun sensors for attitude sensing with wheels and
thrusters for torque. Its torqued gyroscopes slewed the reference-pointing direction,
and payload star sensors allowed accurate reference and correction of gyro drift.
Radiation pressure causes the main disturbance torques for FLTSATCOM. Gravity
gradient and aerodynamics were the chieftorques for HEAO-B. See Table 10-18 and
Sec.H.I.
Table 10-39 shows weight and power values for components of the complete
guidance, navigation, and control subsystems (including redundancy) for both
FLTSATCOM and HEAD-B.
TABLE 10-39•. WeIght and Power for the Attltude-Control Component.
FLTSATCOM
Component

HEAo-B

Mass (kg)

Power(W)

Mass (kg)

1.5
72

0
12

1.6

Sensors
Sun sensors
Earth sensors
Gyroscopes

Processing Electronics
Reaction Wheels
Solar AlTay Drives

Total

-

-

-

19.6 (6)

23.8

12.8

49.0

11.3 (2)

8

53.8 (4)

13.9(2)

02 (2)

-

57.7

33

124.0

Power(W)

-

201

TABLE 10-38. Attltude-Control RequIrements for FLTSATCOM and HEAQ-S.
RequIrement

Payload Requirements
Article to be pointed
Pointing direction
Pointing accuracy
Pointing stability
Slew rate
Exclusion

FLTSATCOM

Communication antennas
Nadir
O.25deg

-

HEAQ-S

X-ray telescope
Anywhere
1 arcmin
30 arcsec In 1 hr
10deg!min
WIthin 15 deg of Sun

Other Requirements
Sun pointing
Pointing during llII

Yaw (Z-axis) controDed to keep
Y-axis normal to orbital plane
Yaw (Z-axis) control as above

roll (X-axis) controlled to
keep Sun In X-Z plane

FLTSATCOM employed a single system for tracking, telemetry, and command
(IT&C). This spacecraft uses only 977 commands for infrequent commanding. The
telemetry requirements are 178 mainframe words (05 s frame rate) and fewer than
1,000 subcommutated words-typical of a minimum subsystem for TT&C. A widebeam antenna mounted on the tip of the main payload's antenna mast ensures
communications access to the satellite.
The communications requirements for HEAD-B were driven by HEAO's lowaltitude and low-inclination orbit, which allowed infrequent access to the spacecraft
for commanding and data readout Table 10-40 summariies characteristics of the
communications subsystem and the subsystem for command and data handling.
HEAD-B's spacecraft had to maneuver and take payload data while out of sight of a
ground station. The commanding subsystem included a stored command programmer
which coUld store and execute 256 commands. Data remained on a tape recorder until
the ground station read it out at communication intervals.

348

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

10.6

TABLE 10-40. CharacterisUcs of the Subsystem for Communications and Command and
Data Handling on HEAQ-B.
CharacterisUc

DescrIption

Communications
Frequency

Radiated power
Antennas
Weight

Sband
1.0W
2 wide beam cross strapped
16.2 kg

Tape Recorder
Capacity
Data rate
Weight
Power (communications and
tape recorder)

84 x 106 bits
6.4 kbps and 128 kbps
13.8 kg
3.4 W cruise; 78.4 W ground pass

Command am! Data Handling
Command rate
Stored commands
Telemetry rate
Weight
Power

TABLE 10-41. CharacterisUcs and Components of the ElectrIc-Power Subsystems.
CharacterisUcs and
Components

The FLTSATCOM and HEAC-B components require temperatures of 5-50 °C
---no challenge to the designers. Thermal balance is achieved by mounting the components on external panels of the equipment compartment and allowing the panels to
radiate excess heat to space. Second-surface mirrors serve as radiators, taking
advantage of their low solar absorptivity and high infrared emissivity. Areas not
required for radiation are insulated. The spacecraft's interior surfaces are black to
enhance internal heat transfer, and guard heaters prevent excessively low temperatures
when equipment is off, or on sensitive assemblies such as propellant lines.
Table 10-35 presented power budgets for FLTSATCOM and HEAO-B. Table
10-41 shows the characteristics and components of their power subsystems. FLTSAT~
COM uses planar arrays oriented toward the Sun by solar-array drives and controls the
body's attitude about the Z-axis (yaw control). The array produces 1,800 W at beginning of life. HEAO-B used planar solar panels which were body-mounted. They were
oriented toward the Sun by X-axis (roll) attitude control which kept the Sun in the X-Z
body plane. With this attitude, the Sun was up to 75 deg away from the array normal.
To improve this poor illumination, designers sized the array for 1,500 W under full
solar illumination.
Both FLTSATCOM and HEAC-B use NiCd batteries. The cycle life for FLTSATCOM was less than 1,000 cycles, and the three batteries operated at 70% depth of
discharge. They also contain bypass electronics to allow removal of failed cells. The
three HEAC-B batteries had a cycle life of over 5,000 cycles and operated at 20%
depth of discharge.
Table 10-41 also shows the characteristics of the power control, switching, cabling,
and conversion equipment on FLTSATCOM and HEAO-B. The FLTSATCOM
spacecraft uses an unregulated bus and switches power to user subsystems in central
power-control units. A central power converter provides secondary power for the
spacecraft bus subsystems. HEAO-B used a regulated solar array and also switched
power to users in a set of integration assemblies. These units also contained power
converters.

FLTSATCOM

HEAQ-B

Solar Arrays
Power output BOL
Size
Weight

1,800 W BOL normal Incidence
1,200W@7year23deglncldence
Two 2.8 m x 3.8 m panels
92.6 kg

1,500 Wnormal Incidence
613 W @ 15 deglncldence
13.9m2
77.1 kg

600 W·hr (24 A·hr)
89.6 kg total

550 W·hr (20 A·hr)
89.6 kg total

Unregulated array
9.7 kg
12.9W

Regulated array
33.1 kg
26W

Central switching assemblies
(1 for SIC, 2 for PIL)
29.3 kg
4.3 W (SIC bus)

Central switching assembly
(1 for SIC, 1 for PIL)
35.5 kg
Included in power control

Central SIC bus converter;
Separate PIL converters
8.5 kg SIC bus, 78.3 kg PIL
14.3 W SIC bus, 192 W PIL

Converter In switching assembly; Separate ACS and C&DH
4.6 kg ACS, 3.3 kg C&DH
included In subsystems

72.7 kg
24W

133.8 kg
Included above

Battery
Capacity
Weight

Power Control

Type
200 bps
256 30 bit commands
6.4 and 128 kbps
28.4 kg
33.8 W cruise; 41.6 W ground pass

349

Examples

10.6

Weight
Power

Power Switching

Type
Weight
Power

Power conversion

Type
Weight
Power

Cabling
Weight
Power

Table 10-42 summarizes the structuraI design of FLTSATCOM and HEAO-B.
Figure 10-4 shows the structure ofFLTSATCOM, and Fig. 10-5 shows the structure
ofHEAC-B. The HEAO-B structure was a semi-monocoque in which longerons, stiffened skin panels, and rings carried the loads. Both spacecraft were launched on the
Atlas-Centaur and were designed to substantially the same boost loads. In the launch
configuration, both spacecraft were about the same diameter, although IlEAC-B was
slightly longer. The on-orbit configurations of the spacecraft were quite different
because FLTSATCOM has a large, deployable, solar array and deployed antennas.
IlEAC-B had essentially the same configuration on orbit as during launch. The two
spacecraft had different designs for the load-carrying structure. FLTSATCOM carries
loads with a central cylinder. The equipment compartment mounts around this cylinder, and the deployables stay around the outside of the compartment during boost.

Design Integration
Table 10-43 gives relations for estimating the spacecraft's size based on its weight.
Equations. (10-12) and (10-13) give relations for estimating solar-array area and
weight based on the spacecraft's total power. The table compares the actual parameters
for FLTSATCOM and HEAO-B to the estimated values.

350

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

10.6

Examples

10.6

351

TABLE 111-42. Structural CharacterisUcs of FLTSATCOM and HEAQ-B DesIgns.
CharacterisUc

FLTSATCOM

HEAQ-B

154 kg

n9kg

Primary structure

Central cylinder

Semi-monocoque

Solar array

Aluminum honeycomb panels
deployed in two wings

Aluminum honeycomb panels
body mounted

Weight
Des/gnApproach

Equipment compartment Honeycomb panels mounted to
longeron-stringer frame
Deployables

TABLE 111-43.

Wrapped around or folded over
equip compertment during boost

EsUmated vs. Actual Sizes ofFLTSATCOM and HEAQ-B.

Spacecraft
Parameters

Fig. 111-4. FLTSATCOM Structure.

Units

FLTSATCOM
EsUmated

HEAQ-S

Actual

EsUmated

Actual

Spacecraft Loaded Weight

kg

927

3,154

Spacecraft Power BOL

W

1800

1,500

Volume
Compartment
Folded Spacecraft

m3
m3

Unear Dimension
Diameter
Length

m
m

2.9

2.4
5.1

4.4

2.7
6.8

Body Area

rrJ2

8.5

12.3

19.2

18.1

Solar-Array Area

rrJ2

18

21.5

15

13.9

Offset to Solar-Array Area

m

5.9

5.2

NlA

NlA

881.3

916.4
828.5

Imln 6,783.2
lmax 6,783.2

1,963.1
4,860.9

Deployed Ixx

3453.3

3388.9

Iyy

935.3

825.8

Moments of Inertia
Folded
w/AKM
w/oAKM

Fig. 10-5. HEAQ-B Structure.

Honeycomb panels mounted to
structural frame

9.27

31.5
5.0
28.2

-

37.8

-

kg·rrJ2

352

Spacecraft Design and Sizing

10.6

References
Agrawal: Brij N. 1986. Design ofGeosynchronous Spacecraft. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, Inc.

Chapter 11

Chetty, P.R.K. 1991. Satellite Technology and Its Applications (2nd edition). New
York: TAB Books.

Spacecraft Subsystems

Frazie~, RE. 1986. HEAO Case Study in Spacecraft Design. AlAA Professional Study

11.1

Senes. TRW Report 26000-100-102. Washington, DC: American Iristitute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics.
Griffin: Mich~l D. ~d James R Fren~h. 1991. Space Vehicle Design. Washington,
DC. Amencan Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
Reeves, ~ery 1. 1979. FLTSATCOM Case Study in Spacecraft Design. AlAA
Profe~lOnal ~tudy Series. TRW Report 26700-100-054-01.Washington, DC:
Amencan Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
TRW Defense and Space Systems Group. 1980-1985. 1RW Space Log, vols. 17-21.
Redondo Beach, CA: TRW, Inc.

11.2

Attitude Determination and Control
Control Modes and Requirements; Selection of Spacecraft Control
Type; Quantify the Disturbance Environment; Select and Size ADCS
Hardware; Define the Control Algorithms
Telemetry, Tracking, and Command

Requirements; Designing the 1T&C Subsystem

11.3

Command and Data Handling

Introduction to C&DH; C&DH SystemSking Process; C&DH Basics;
A Final Note
11.4

11.5

U.S. Department of Defense. 1991. Reliability Prediction o/Electronic Equipment.
MIL-HDBK-217 (f).
11.6

Power
Power Sources; Energy Storage; Power Distribution; Power
Regulation and Control
Thermal
Spacecraft Thermal Environment; Thermal Control Components;
The Thefmal Design and Development Process; Thermal
Control Challenges; Heat Balance Estimation; Mass, Power,
Telemetry Estimates
Structures and Mechanisms

Structural Requirements; Packaging and Configuring
theSubsystem; Design Options; Structural Design Philosophy and
Criteria; Preliminary Sizing of Structural Members; Structural
Mechanics and Analysis; An Example Problem; Mechanisms and
Deployables
11.7

Guidance and Navigation

System Definition Process; Orbit Determination Systems; Orbit Maintenance and Control; Sizing Autonomous Guidance and Navigation

This chapter provides design information for the spacecraft bus subsystems,
emphasizing material most pertinent to the spacecraft engineer. It offers practical
insight into the mission and interface requirements that drive how we configure
spacecraft. We include first-order approximations and describe hardware to show how
each subsystem works and to help estimate the subsystem's size, weight. power
requirements, and eventual cost. We also reference many chapters of this book to
integrate concepts and subsystems. Chapter 17 discusses the propulsion subsystem,
and Chap. 13 provides much of the communications theory. Chapter 10, Agrawal
[19861, Chetty [19911, and Morgan and Gordon [19891 provide insight to the theory
and practice of designing spacecraft subsystems.
In the rest of this chapter we will discuss these issues and an approach for estimating the size and configuration of spacecraft subsystems.

353

354

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.1

11.1 Attitude Determination and Control
John S. Etemo, Ball Aerospace & Technologies Corporation

The attitude determination and control subsystem (ADeS) stabilizes the vehicle
and orientS it in desired directions during the mission despite the external disturbance
torques acti~g o~ it. This requires that the vehicle determine its attitude, using sensors,
and control It. ~Ing actuators. The ADCS often is tightly coupled to other subsystems
on board, especIally the propulsion (Chap. 17) and navigation (Sec. 11.7) functions.
Additional information on attitude determination and control can be found in Wertz
[1978, 2001], Kaplan [1976], Agrawal [1986], Hughes [1986], Griffin and French
[1990], Chobotov [1991], and Fortescue and Stark [1992].
We begin by discussing several useful concepts and definitions including mass
properties, disturbance torques, angular momentum, and reference v~ors. The mass
properties of a spacecraft are key in determining the size of control and disturbance
torques. We typically need to know the location of the center of mass or gravity (cg)
as well as the elements of the inertia matrix: the moments and products of inertia about
chose? re~erence axes .. (S~ Sec. 11.6 for examples of moment of inertia calculations.)
The dIreCtion of the pnnCIpal axes-~ose axes for which the inertia matrix is diagonal
and the products of inertia are zero-are also of interest. Finally, we need to know how
these properties change with time, as fuel or other consumables are used, or as appendages are moved or deployed.
A body in space. is subject to small but persistent disturbance torques (e.g.,
~()-4 ~'m) !fom a vanety of sources. These torques are categorized as cyclic, varying
In a SI~USOIdal manner during an orbit. or secular, accumulating with time, and not
averagIng out over an orbit. These torques would quickly reorient the vehicle unless
resist~ in .some w~y. ~ ADCS system resists these torques either passively, by
explOIting Inherent Inertia or magnetic properties to make the "disturbances" stabilizing and their effects tolerable, or actively, by sensing the resulting motion and
applying corrective torques.
Angular momentum plays an important role in space, where torques typically are
s~all and spacecraft are unconstrained. For a body initially at rest. an external torque
wd~ cause.the body to angularly accelerate proportionally to the torque-resulting in
an.IncreasIn~ angular velocity. Conversely, if the body is initially spinning about an
aJ?s perpendIcular to the applied torque, then the body spin axis will precess, moving
~th a constant angular velocity proportional to the torque. Thus, spinning bodies act
hke gyroscopes, inherently resisting disturbance torques in 2 axes by responding with
constant. rather.th~ increasing, angular velocity. This property of spinning bodies,
called gyro~co!"C stiffness, can be used to reduce the effect of small; cyclic disturbance
torques. ThIS IS true whether the entire body spins or just a portion of it, such as a
momentum wheel or spinning rotor.
Conservation of vehicle angular momentum requires that only externa1 torques
change the system net angular momentum. Thus, external disturbances must be
~esisted by external control torques (e.g., thrusters or magnetic torquers) or the resultIng ~noI?entum buildup must be stored internally (e.g.• by reaction wheels) without
reonenti~g the vehicle ~yond its allowable limits. The momentum buildup due to
secular dIsturbances ultimately must be reduced by applying compensating external
control torques.

Attitude Determination and Control

11.1

355

Often, in addition to rejecting disturbances, tlte ADCS must reorient the vehicle (in

slew maneuvers) to repoint the payload, solar arrays, or antennas. These periodic
repointing requirements may drive the design to larger actuators than would be
required for disturbance rejection alone.
To orient the vehicle correctly, external references must be used to determine the
vehicle's absolute attitude. These references include the Sun, the Earth·s IR horizon,
the local magnetic field direction. and the stars. In addition, inertial sensors (gyr0scopes) also can be carried to provide a short-term attitude reference between external
updates. External references (e.g., Sun angles) are usually measured as body-centered
angular distances to a vector. Each such vector measurement provides only two of the
three independent parameters needed to specify the orientation of the spacecraft. This
results in tlte need for multiple sensor types on board most spacecraft.
Table 11-1 lists the steps for designing an ADCS for spacecraft. The f'"rreSat spacecraft. shown in Fig. II-I. will be used to illustrate this process. The process must be
iterative. witlt mission requirements and vehicle mass propertieS closely related to the
ADCS approach. Also, a rough estimate of disturbance torques (see Chap. 10) is necessary before tlte type of control is selected (step 2), even though the type of control
will help determine the real disturbance environment (step 3).

To ~

M=215 kg
Ix =IZ a 90kg.m 2
ly a 90kg.rn2
OrbIt aI1IIude 0 700 km. circular
lIIeIIme 05 yr
Slew rate < 0.1 deg/s
Po!nllng accwacy = 0.1 <leg
MIssIon Is EaJIh.IooIcIng except

one opIIonaI30 deg maneuver per
month to a taJgeI 01 oppor1un!!y

Rg.11-1. HypotheUcai RreSat Spacecraft. We use this slmplmed example to discuss key
concepts throughout this section. See Ag. 5-1 for Illustration of roD-pitch-yaw

coordinates.

11.1.1· Control Modes and Requirements
Tables 11-2 and 11-3 describe typical spacecraft control modes and requirements. The ADCS requirements are closely tied to mission needs and other subsystem
characteristics. as shown in Fig. 11-2. These requirements may vary considerably with
mission phase or modes, challenging the designer to develop a single hardware suite
for different objectives.
For many spacecraft, the ADCS must control vehicle attitude during firing of large
liquid or solid rocket motors. which may be used during orbit insertion or for orbit
changes. Large motors create large disturbance torques, which can drive the design to
larger actuators tltan are needed once on station.

356

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.1

TABLE 11-1. Control System Design ProCess. An iterative process is used for designing the
ADCS as part of the overaU spacecraft system.
Step

Inputs

1a Define control
modes
1b. Deflneorderlve
system-level
requirements
by control
mode

Mission
requirements,
mission profile,
type of Insertion
for launch
vehicle

2. Select type
of spacecraft
control by
attitude
control mode
(Sec. 11.1.2)

Payload,

thermal and
power needs
Orbit, pointing
direction
Disturbance
environment

3. Quantify
disturbance
environment
(Sec. 11.1.3)

4. Select and
slzeADCS
hardware
(Sec. 11.1.4)

5. Define
determination
and control
algorithms

Spacecraft
geometry, orbit,
solar/magnetic
models, mission
prome

. Spacecraft
geometry,
pointing
accuracy,
orbit conditions,
mission
requirements,
lifetime, orbit,
pointing
direction,
slew rates
All of above

Outputs
Us! of different control

modes during mission
(See Table 11-2)
Requirements and
constraints
(See Table 11-3)

Data processing
electronics, if any, or
processing requirements
for other subsystems or
ground computer
Algorithms, parameters,
and logic for each
determination and control
mode

All of above

Description

Mode

Orbit
Insertfon

Normal: nadir pointing,
< 0.1 deg; autonomous
determination (Earth-relatlve)

Period during and after boost while spacecraft Is brought to final orbit. OptIons
Include no spacecraft control, simple spin stabHlzatlon ofsoOd rocket motor, and full
spacecraft control using liquid propulsion system.

AcqUIsition

Initial determination of attitude and stabilization of vehicle. Also may be used to
recover from power upsets or emergencies.

Optional slew: One 30 deg
maneuver per month to
a target of opportunity

Normal,
On-StatJon

Used for the vast majority of the miSS/on. Requirements for this mode should drive
system design.

Slew

Reorienting the vehicle when required.

Contingency
or Safe

Used In emergencies if regular mode fans or Is disabled. May use less power or
sacrifice normal operation to meet power or thermal constraints.

SpecIal

Requirements may be different for special targets or time periods, such as eclipses.

TABLE 11-3. Typical AHltude Determination and Control Performance Requirements.
Requirements need to be specified for each mode. The following lists the areas of
perfonmanca frequently specified.
Area

Definition·

Examples/Comments

DETERMINATION

Accuracy

How well a vehicle's orientation with
0.25 deg, 3 0, all axes; may be real-time
respect to an absolute reference Is known or post-processed on the ground

Range

Range of angular motion over which
accuracy must be met

Accumcy

How well the vehicle attitude can be
controlled with respect to a commanded
direction

0.25 deg, 3 0; Includes determination and
control errors, may be taken with respect
to an Inertial or Earth-fixed reference

4 Sun sensors,
0.1 deg accuracy

Range

Range of angular motion over which
control performance must be met

All attitudes, within 50 deg of nadir, within
20 deg of Sun

1 3-axis magnetometer,
1 deg accuracy

Jitter

A specified angle bound or angular rate
0.1 deg over 1 min, 1 degls,1 to 20 Hz;
limit on short-term, high-frequency motion usually specified to keep spacecraft
motion from blurring sensor daIa

Drift

A Omit on slow, low-frequency vehicle
motion. Usually expressed as angleltlme.

1 deglhr, 5 deg max. Used when vehicle
may drift off target with Infrequent resets
(espectally If actual direction Is known)

SettJJng 17me

Specifies allowed time to recover from
maneuvers or upsets.

2 deg max motion, decaying to < 0.1 deg
In 1 min; may be used to Ifm!t overshoot,
ringing, or nutation

1 Momentum wheel,
Momentum: 40 N'm-s
2 Horizon sensors,
Scannlng,O.1 deg accuracy

. Determination: Horizon dala
filtered for pitch and roll.
Magnetometer and Sun sensors
used for yaw.

Reflned requirements
and design

Any attitude within 30 deg of nadir

CONTROL

3 Electromagnets,
Dipole moment: 10 A·m2

Control: Proportlonal-plusderivative for pitch, Coupled rollyaw control with electromagnets
6. Iterate and
document

TABLE 11-2. Typical Attitude Control Modes. Performance requirements are frequently
taUored to these different control operating modes.
.

RreSat Example

Values for forces from
Gravity gradient 1.8 x 1~ N'm
gravity gradient, magnetic normal pointing; 4.4 x 1()-5 N'm
aerodynamics, solar
during target-ot-opportunlty
pressure, Intemal
mode
disturbances, and powered
Magnetic: 4.5 x 1()-5 N'm
flight effects on control
Solar: 6.6 x 10-6 N'm
(cg offsets, slosh)
Aerodynamic: 3.4 x 1~ N'm

Control actuators, e.g.,
reaction wheels, thrusters,
or magnatlc torquers

357

Orbit InJection: none-provlded
by launch vehicle

Method for stabilizing and
Momentum bles stabilization
control: 3-axis, spinning, or with a pitch wheel, electrogravity gradient
magnets for momentum
dumping, and optionally,
thrusters for slewing
(shared with AV system
In navigation)

Sensor suite: Earth, Sun,
Inertial, or other sensing
devices

Attitude Determination and Control

11.1

• DefInItIons vary with procuring and designing agencies, espectally In details (e.g., 1 or 3 0, amount of
averaging or mterlng aUowed). " Is always best to define exactly what Is required.

Subsystem specification

• Repoint the payload's sensing systems to targets of opportunity
~ce the spacecraft is on station, the payload pointing requirements usually
dommate. These may require Earth-relative or inertial attitudes, and fixed or spinning
fields of view. In addition, we must define the need for and frequency of attitude slew
maneuvers. Such maneuvers may be necessary to:

• Maneuver the attitude control system's sensors to celestial targets for attitude
determination
• Track stationary or moving targets
• Acquire the desired satellite attitude initially or after a failure

358

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.1

Mission
o
o

Earth-Pointing or Inertial-Pointing?
Control During .1V Bums?

o

o

AccuracyISlabDily Needs?
Slewing RequlJements?

Thermai
o

Special
Thermal

Autonomy?
Mlsslon LIfII?

o

Onboard Navigation Data Required?

----~~
Thruster Size

~~

o PropeOant Load
o

MInImum

o
o
o
o

~~-....--'~

Impulse Bit

°

Communications
Antenna

o

__
R8QU_IaII_on-J0

Power
o

Solar Array
Pointing
Required?

Type

Centero!
Mass
Constraints

o

Inertia

o

ConstraInts
RexlbDily
Thruster
Location

o

Sensor
Mounting

FJg.11-2. The Impact of Mission Requirements and Other Subsystems on the ADCS
Subsystem. Direction of arrows shows requirements flow from one 'subsystem to
another.

In most cases, we do not need to rotate the spacecraft quickly. But retargeting time
may be critical for some applications. In either case, slewing mainly influences the
choice and size of actuators. For example, the vehicle's maximum slew mte determines the thrusters' size or the reaction wheel's maximum torque. High-mte maneuvers may require other actuation systems, such as a second set of high-thrust reaction
jets or perhaps control moment gyros.
For FireSat, we assume that the launch vehicle places us in our final orbit, with no
need for ADCS control during orbit insertion. The normal pointing requirement is
0.1 deg, nadir-oriented. Attitude determination must be autonomous, providing Earthrelative knowledge better than 0.1 deg (to support the pointing requirement) while the
vehicle is within 30 deg of nadir. In addition to these basic requirements, we will
consider an optional requirement for occasional repoin~g of the spacecraft to a region
of interest. We want to examine how such a requirement would influence the design,
increasing the complexity and capability of the ADCS. For this option, we will assume
the requirement to repoint the vehicle once every 30 days. It must repoint, or slew, up
to 30 deg in under 10 min, and hold the relative nadir orientation for 90 min.

Attitude
Maneuverability

Typical

Ufetlme
Umlts

Accuracy

Earth local
vertical only

Very nmlted

±5 deg (2 axes)

None

Gra~-gradlent

Earth local
vertical only

Very limited

:t5 deg (3 axes)

ute of wheel

pessJve Magnetic North/south only Very limited

:t5 deg (2 axes)

and omentum
Bias Wheel

bearings

None

High propellant
±D.1 d:\to±1 degln Thrusterpropenant
usage to move stIfI 2 axes rorrtlonal (lfappOes)O
momentum vector to spin rate

Pure Spin
StabOlzaUon

InertlaDy fixed
any direction
Repaint with
precession
maneuvers

Dual-5pin
StabOlzaUon

limited only by Momentum vector
same as above
articulation on
daspun platform Despun platform
constrained by Its
own geometry

Constraints

o

Pointing
Options

Gravity-gradlent

Structures
o

Pointing
Accuracy

Special

0

PassIve
StabDizallon
On-orbit VB. Ground
Determination
Sensor Selection
ActuatIon Devlce
Selection
Computational
ArchIIscIure
VB.

Propulsion

1 r

Power
oACSLoad

~:Sn!~3-lOOs

Maneuvers

11.1.2 Selection of Spacecraft Control Type
Once we have defined the subsystem requirements, we are ready to select a method
of controlling the spacecraft. Table 11-4 lists several different methods of control,
along with typical chamcteristics of each.
TABLE 11-4. Attitude Control Methods and Their Capabilities. As requirements become
tighter, more complex control systems become necessary.

~

Required?

o

0Ib1t?

o
o
o

o Separate Payload Platform?

359

Attitude Determination and Control

11.1

Same as above for
spin section
Despun dictated by
payload reference
and polnllng

°

Thruster propeDant
(If appOes)"
Despln bearings

Bias Momentum
(1 wheel)

Best suited for
local vertical
pointing

Momentum vector ±O.1 deg to ±1 deg
of the bias wheel
pretersto=
normal to orb
plane, constraining
yaw maneuver

PropeDant
[lfappUes)*
ute of sensor and
wheel bearings

Zero Momentum
(thruster only)

No constraints

±D.1 deg to ±5 deg
No constraints
High rates possible

PropeDant

Zero Momentum
(3whesls)

No constraints

No constraints

±D.OO1 deg to ±1 deg

=0

ute of sensor and
wheel bearings
Zero Momentum
CMG

No constraints

±D.OO1 deg to ±1 deg PropeDant
No constraints
(If appDes)*
High rates possible
ute of sensor and
wheel bearings

"Thrusters may be used for slewing and momentum dumping at an altitudes. Magnetic torquers may be
used from LEO to GEO.

Passive Control Techniques. Gravity-gradient control uses the inertial properties
of a vehicle to keep it pointed toward the Earth. This relies on the fact that an elongated
object in a gmvity field tends to align its longitudinal axis through the Earth's center.
The torques which cause this alignment decrease with the cube of the orbit milius, and
are symmetric around the nadir vector, thus not influencing the yaw of a spacecraft
around the nadir vector. This tendency is used on simple spacecraft in near-Earth
orbits without yaw orientation requirements, often with deployed booms to achieve the
desired inertias.

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.1

Frequently, we add dampers to gravity-gradient spacecraft to reduce libration
-small oscillations around the nadir vector caused by distUrbances. Gravity-gradient
spa~ are P:uncul:rrly sensitive to thermal shocks on long deployed booms when
entenng or leaVIng eclIpses. They also need a method of ensuring attitude capture with
the correct end of the spacecraft pointed at nadir-the gravity-gradient torques make
either end along the minimum inertia axis equally stable.
In the simplest gravity-gradient spacecraft, only two orientation axes are
controlled. The orientation around the nadir vector is unconstrained. To control this
axis,. a s~l, ~onstant-speed mo~entum wheel is. sometimes added along the
mtended pItch axts (I.e., an axts perpendicular to the nadir and velocity vectors). This
':Yaw" whee~ is stable when it aligns with the orbit normal, and small energy dissipation mecharusms on board cause the spacecraft to seek this minimum energy stable
orientation without active control.
'
A third type of purely passive control uses permanent magnets on board the
spacecraft to force alignment along the Earth's magnetic field. This is most effective
in near-equatorial orbits where the field orientation stays almost constant for an Earthpointing vehicle.
~pin Con~l Techniques. Spin stabilization is a passive control technique in
whIch the entire spacecraft rotates so that its angular momentum vector remains
approximately fixed in inertial space. Spin-stabilized spacecraft (or spinners), employ
the gyroscopic stability discussed earlier to passively resist disturbance torques about
two axes. The spinning motion is stable (in its minimum energy state) if the vehicle is
sp~nning about the axis having the largest moment of inertia. Energy dissipation mechanISms on board, such as fuel slosh and structural damping) will cause any vehicle to
head toward this state if uncontrolled. Thus disk-shaped spinners are passively stable
w!rile pencil-shaped vehicles are not. Spinners can be simple, survive for long periods
Wlth?ut attention, provide a thermally benign environment for components, and
proVIde a scanning motion for sensors. The principal disadvantages of spin stabilization are (1) that the vehicle mass properties must be controlled to ensure the desired
spin direction and stability and (2) that the angular momentum vector requires more
fuel ~o reori~t than a vehicle with no net angular momentum, reducing the usefulness
of thIS technique for payloads that must be repointed frequently.
It takes extra fuel to reorient a spinner because of the gyroscopic stiffness which
also helps it resist disturbances. In reorienting a spinning body with angular momentum,. h, a constant torque, T, will produce an angular velocity, (i), perpendicular to the
applIed torque and angular momentum vector, of magnitude (i) =TIh. Thus, the higher
the stored momentum is, the more torque must be applied for a given (i). For a maneuver through ~ angle 9, the torque-time product-an indication of fuel required for the
?I~euver-Is a co~tant equal to h9. Conversely, for a nonspinning vehicle with no
lmtial angular ~eloclty, a small torque can be used to start it rotating, with an opposite
torque to stop It. The fuel used for any angle maneuver can be infinitesimally small if
a slow maneuver is acceptable.
A useful variation of spin control is called dual-spin stabilization, where the
space<:ra!t has two sectiO?S spin~g at diffc:rent rates about the same axis. Normally,
one section, the rotor, spms rapIdly to proVide angular momentum while the second
section, the stator or platform, is despun to keep one axis pointed t~ward the Earth or
S~. By combining inertiaIly fixed and rotating sections on the same vehicle, dual
SPlDDers ~ ~omm~te a variety of payloads in a simple vehicle. Also, by adding
energy diSsIpation deVIces to the platform, a dual spinner can be passively stable

!hlrd

H.I

Attitude Determination and Control

361

spinning about the axis with the smallest moment of inertia. This permits more pencilshaped spacecraft, which fit better in laun~h vehicle fairings. Th~ disadv~tag~ of
dual-spin stabilization is the added co~pleXity ?f the platform bearing and slIp ~~gs
between the sections. This compleXity can Increase cost and reduce reliabIlity
.
compared to simple spin stabilization.
Spinning spacecraft, both simple and dual, exhibit several distinct types of motion
which often are confused. Precession is the motion of the angular momentum vector
caused by external torques such as thruster firings. Wobble is the ap~ent motion of
the body when it is spinning with the angular momentum v~or aligned along a
principal axis of inertia which is offset from a body reference axis-for example, the
intended spin axis. This looks like motion of the intended spin axis around the angular
momentum vector at the spin rate.
Nutation is the torque-free motion of the spacecraft body when the angular
momentum vector is not perfectly aligned along a principal axis of inertia. For rodshaped objects, this motion is a slow rotation (compared to spin rate) of the spin axis
around the angular momentum vector. For these objects, spinning about a minimum
inertia axis, additional energy dissipation will cause increased nutation. For diskshaped objects, spinning around a maximum inertia axis, nutation appears as a high~r­
than-spin-rate tumbling. Energy dissipation for these objects (e.g., with a passive
nutation damper) reduces nutation, resulting in a clean spin.
Nutation is caused by disturbances such as thruster impulses, and can be seen as
varying signals in body-mounted inertial and external sensors. Wobble is caused by
imbalance and appears as constant offsets in body-mounted sensors. Such constant
offsets are rarely discernible unless multiple sensors are available.
Spin stability normally requires active control, such as mass expulsion or magnetic
coils. to periodically adjust the spacecraft's attitude and spin rate to coun~eract
disturbance torques. In addition, we may need to damp the nutation caused by disturbances, precession commands, or fuel slosh. Aggravating this nutation is the effect of
structural flexure and fuel slosh, which is present in any space vehicle to one degree
or another. Once the excitation stops, nutation decreases as these same factors dissipate the energy. But this natural damping can take hours. We can neutralize this source
of error in minutes with nutation dampers (see Sec. 11.1.2). We can also reduce the
amount of nutation from these sources by increasing the spin rate, thus increasing the
stiffness of the spinning vehicle. If the spin rate is 20 rpm, and the nutation angle is
3 deg, then at 60 rpm the nutation angle would decrease by a factor of three. Y'e seldom use spin rates above 90 rpm because of the large centrifugal forces and their effect
on structural design and weight. In thrusting and pointing applications, spin !~tes
under 20 rpm may allow excessive nutation and are not used. However, noncntical
applications, such as thermal control, are frequently insensitive to nutation and may
employ very low spin rates.
Three-axis Control Techniques. Spacecraft stabilized in 3 axes are more common
today than those using spin or gravity gradient. They maneuver and can be stable ~d
accurate, depending on their sensors and actuators. But they are also more expensIve
and more complex. The control torques about the axes of 3-axis systems come from
combinations of momentum wheels, reaction wheels, control moment gyros, thrusters.
or magnetic torquers. Broadly, however, these systems take two forms: one uses momentum bias by placing a momentum wheel along the pitch axis; the other is called
zero momentum with a reaction wheel on each axis. Either option usually needs thrusters or magnetic torquers as well as the wheels.

362

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.1

In a zero-momentum system, reaction wheels respond to disturbances on the vehicle. For example, a vehicle-pointing error creates a signal which speeds up the wheel,
initially at zero. This torque corrects the vehicle and leaves the wheel spinning at low
speed, until another pointing error speeds the wheel further or slows it down again. If
the disturbance is cyclic during each orbit, the wheel may not approach saturation
speed for several orbits. Secular disturbances, however, cause the wheel to drift toward
saturation. We then must apply an external torque, usually with a thruster or magnetic
torquer, to force the wheel speed back to zero. This process, called desaturation,
momentum unloading, or momentum dumping, can be done automatically or by command from the ground.
When high torque is required for large vehicles or fast slews, a variation of 3-axis
control is possible using control moment gyros, or CMGs. These devices work like
momentum wheels on gimbals. (See Sec. 11.1.4 for a further discussion of CMOs.)
The control of CMOs is complex, but their available torque for a given weight and
power can make them attractive. .
As a final type of zero momentum 3-axis control, simple all-thruster systems are
used for short durations when high torque is needed, such as orbit insertion or during
Il V bums from large motors. These thrusters then may be used for different purposes
such as momentum dumping during other mission modes.
Momentum bias systems often have just one wheel with its spin axis mounted along
the pitch axis, normal to the orbit plane. The wheel is run at a nearly constant, high
speed to provide gyroscopic stiffness to the vehicle, just as in spin stabilization, with
similar nutation dynamics. Around the pitch axis, however, the spacecraft can control
attitude by torquing the wheel, slightly increasing or decreasing its speed. Periodically,
the pitch wheel must be desaturated (brought back to its nominal speed), as in zeromomentum systems, using thrusters or magnets.
The dynamics of nadir-oriented momentum-bias vehicles exhibit a phenomenon
known as roll-yaw coupling. To see this coupling, consider an inertially-fixed angular
momentum vector at some angle with respect to the orbit plane. If the angle is initially
a positive roll error, then 1/4 orbit later it appears purely about the yaw axis as a
negative yaw error. As the vehicle continues around the orbit, the angle goes through
negative roll and positive yaw before realigning as positive roll. This coupling, which
is due to the apparent motion of the Earth and, therefore, the Earth-fixed coordinate
frame as seen from the spacecraft, can be exploited to control roll and yaw over a quarter orbit using only a roll sensor.
Effects of Requirements on Control Type. With the above knowledge of control
types, we can proceed to select a type which best meets mission requirements. Tables
11-5 through 11-7 describe the effects of orbit insertion, payload pointing, and payload
slew requirements on the selection process.
A common control approach during orbit insertion is to use the short-term spin
stability of the spacecraft-orbit-insertion motor combination. Once on station, the
motor may be jettisoned, the spacecraft despun using jets or a yo-yo device, and a
different control technique used.
Payload pointing will influence the ADCS control method, the class of sensors, and
the number and kind of actuation devices. Occasionally, pointing accuracies are so
stringent that a separate, articulated platform is necessary. An articulated platform can
perform scanning operations much easier than the host vehicle, with better accuracy
and stability.

Attitude Determination and Control

11.1

TABLE 11-5. Orbit Transition Maneuvers and Their Effect. Using thrusters to change orbits
creates special chilllenges for the ADCS.
Effect on Spacecraft
Requirement
Solid motor or large
'Uirge Impulse to
complete orbit Insertion blpropellant stage.
Large thrusters or a
(thousands of mls)
glmbale.d engine or spin
steblrrzation for attitude
control during bums

Effect on ADOS

lne.rtIaI measurement unit for accurate
reference and velocity me.asurement
Different actuators, sensors, and control
laws for bum vs. coasting phases
Ne.e.d for navigation or guidance '

On-orblt plane
changes to me.et
payload ne.eds or
vehicle operations
(hundreds of mls)

More thrusters, but may be Separate control law for thrusting
enough If coasting phase
Actuators sized for thrusting disturbances
uses thrusters
Onboard attitude reference for thrusting

Orbit maintenance
trim maneuvers
«100 mls)

One set of thrusters

phase
Thrusting control law
Onboard attitude reference

TABLE 11-6. Effect of Payload Pointing DIrections on ADCS DesIgn. The payload pointing
requirements are usually the most Important factors for determining the type of
actuators and sensors.
Requirement

Effect on Spacecraft

Effect on ADCS

Earth-pointing • Gravity-gradle.ntflne
for low accuracies
• Nadir (Earth)
(>1 de.g) only
pointing
•
3-axIs
stebDlzation
• Scanning
acceptable with
• Off-nadir
Earth local vertical
pointing
reference

If gravify-gradlent
• Booms, dampers, Sun sensors, magne.tometer or
horizon sensors for attitude determination
• Momentum whe.el for yaw control

Inert/al
pointing
·Sun
• Celestial
targets
• Payload
targets of
opportunity

If spin
• Payload pointing and attItUde sensor operations
limited without despun platform
• Ne.e.ds thrustars to reorient momentum ve.ctor
• Requires nutation damping
lf3-aJds
• Typically, sensors Include Sun sensors, star tracker,
and inertial meesurament unit
• Reaction whe.els and thrusters are typical actuators
• May require articulate.d payload
(e.g., scan platfprm)

• Spin stebDization
fine for me.cllum
accuracies with few
attitude maneuvers
• Gravity gradient
does not apply
• 3-axIs control Is
most versatile for
frequent
reorientations

lfS-axis
• Horizon sensor for local vertical reference
(pitch and rolQ
• Sun or star sensor for third-axis reference and
attitude determination
• Re.actlon whe.els, momentum whe.els, or control
moment gyros for accurate pointing and propellant
conservation
• Reaction control system for coarse control and
momentum dumping
• Magnetic torque.rs can also dump momentum
• lne.rtIaI me.asurement unit for mane.uvers and
attitude determination

364

spaceeraft Subsystems

11.1

TABLE 11-7. Slewing 'Requirements That Affect Control Actuator Selection. Spacecraft
slew agUity can demand larger actuators for Intermittent use.
Slewing
None

Effect on Spacecraft
Spacecraft constrained to
one attitude-hlghly
improbable

Effect on ADCS
• Reaction wheels, if planned, can be
srnaJler
• If magnetic torque can dump momentum,
may not need thrusters

Nominal ratesMinimal
0.05 deg/s (maintain
local verUcaI) to
0.5deg/s

• Thrusters very Dkely
• Reaction wheels adequate by
themselves only for a few special cases

High rates> O.5deg/s

• Control moment gyros very likely or two
thruster force levels-one for
stationkeeplng and one for high-rate
maneuvers

• Structural impact on
appendages
• Weight and cost Increase

Trade studies on pointing requirements must consider accuracy in determining
attitude and controlling vehicle pointing. We must identify the most stringent requirements. Table 11-8 summarizes effects of accuracy requirements on the spacecraft's
ADCS subsystem approach. Section 5.4 discusseS how to develop pointing budgets.
FireSat Control Selection. For FireSat, we consider two options for orbit insertion
control. Frrst, the launch vehicle may directly inject the spacecraft into its mission
orbit. This common option simplifies the spacecraft design, since no special insertion
mode is needed. An alternate approach, useful for small spacecraft such as FrreSat, is
to use a monopropellant system on board the spacecraft to fly itself up from a low parking orbit to its final altitude. For small insertion motors, reaction wheel torque or
momentum bias stabilization may be sufficient to control the vehicle during this bum.
For larger motors, AV thruster modulation or dedicated ADCS thrusters become
attractive.
Once on-station, the spacecraft must point its sensors at nadir most of the time and
slightly off-nadir for brief periods. Since the payload needs to be despun and the spacecraft frequently reoriented, spin stabilization is not the best choice. Gravity-gradient
and passive magnetic control cannot meet the 0.1 deg pointing requirement or the
30 deg slews. This leaves 3-axis control and momentum-bias stabilization as viable
options for the on-station control as well.
Depending on other factors, either approach might work, and we will baseline
momentum bias control with its simpler hardware requirements. In this case, we will
use a single pitch wheel for momentum and electromagnets for momentum dumping
and roll and yaw control.
For the optional off-nadir pointing requirement, 3-axis control with reaction wheels
might be more appropriate. Also, 3-axis control often can be exploited to simplify the
solar array design, by using one of the unconstrained payload axes (yaw, in this case)
to replace a solar array drive axis. Thus, the reduced array size possible with 2 deg of
freedom can be achieved with one array axis drive and one spacecraft rotation.
11.1.3 Quantify the Disturbance Environment
In this step, we determine the size of the external torques the ADCS must tolerate.
Only three or four sources of torque matter for the typical Earth-orbiting spacecraft.

They are gravity-gradient effects, magnetic-field torques on the vehicle, impingement

Attitude Determination and Control

11.1

365

TABLE 11-8. Effect of Control Accuracy on Sensor Selection and ADCS Design. Accurate
pointing requires better, higher cost, sensors, and actuators.
Required
Accuracy
(3a)
>5deg

1 deg to
5deg

Effect on
Spacecraft
• Permits major cost savings
• Permits gravity.gradlent (GG)
stabilization

• GG not feasible
• Spin stabilization feasible H
stiff, Inertlally fixed attitude Is
acceptable

• Payload needs may require
despun platform on spinner
• 3-axls stabilization wDl work
0.1 deg to • 3-axls and momentum-bias
stabilization feastble
1 deg
• Dual-spin stabirlzation also
feasible

<0.1 deg

Effect on ACCS
WIthout attitude determinatIon

• No sensors required for GG stablDzation
• Boom motor, GG damper, and a bias
momentum wheel are only required actuators
Wlfh attitude determinatIon
• Sun sensors & magnetometer adequate for
attitude determination at ~ 2 deg
• Higher accuracies may require star trackers or
horizon sensors
• Sun sensors and horizon sensors inay be
adequate for sensors, especiaDy a spinner
• Accuracy for 3-axIs stabilization can be met with
RCS deadband control but reaction wheels will
save propellant for long missions
• Thrusters and damper adequate for spinner
actuators
• Magnetic torquers (and magnetometer) useful
• Need for accurate attitude reference leads to
star tracker or horizon sensors & possibly gyros
• Reaction wheels typical with thrusters for
momentum unloading and coarse control
• Magnetic torquers feasible on light vehicles
(magnetometer also required)

• Same as above for 0.1 deg to 1 deg but needs
• 3-axIs stabilization Is
star sensor and better class of gyros
necessary
• Control laws and computational needs are more
• May require articulated &
complex
vibration-isolated payload
platform with separate sensors • AeXlble body performance very Important

by solar-radiation, and, for low-altitude orbits, aerodynami~ torques. Sectio~ 8.1
discusses the Earth environment in detail, and Chap. 10 and.SIDger [1964] F,,!-de a
discussion of disturbances. Tables 11-9A and 11-9B summanze the four major disturbances, provide equations to estimate their size for the worst case, and calculate values
for the FrreSat example.
.
Disturbances can be affected by the spacecraft orientation, mass properties, and
design symmetry. For the normal FrreSat orientation, the larg~t torque is due to th.e
residual magnetism in the spacecraft. If, however, we use the optional ~O-deg off-nadir
pointing, the gravity-gradient torque increases over an o~der of ma~tude, ~ become
as large as the magnetic torque. Note that we use 1 deg ID the graVIty-gradient calc?lations, rather than the 0.1 deg pointing accuracy. This is to account for our uncertain
knowledge of the principal axes. If the principal axes are off by several degrees, ~t
angle may dominate in the disturbance calculations. We also note ~ a less symmetriC
solar array arrangement would have increased both the aerodynamtc and solar torques,
making them closer to the magnetic torque in this example.

366

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.1

TABLE 11-9A. Simplified Equations for EsUmating Worst-case Disturbance Torques
Disturbance torques affect actuator size and momentum storage reqUirements.·
Dlsturbance

Gravitygradient

Influenced
Primarily by

Type

Spacecraft.
inertias
o Orbit altitude

Constanttorque
for Earthoriented
vehicle, cyclic
for inertially
oriented vehicle

Gravity-gradient

19 = : ; liz -lyISin(28)

Spacecraft
geometry
o Spacecraft
surface
reflectivity
o Spacecraft
geometry and
cg location

For R = (6,378 + 700) km = 7,078 km;
Iz= 90 kg-m2,ly = 60 kg-m2and
()= 1 deg (normal mode) or 30 deg (optional target-of-opportunity mode):
normal:

where Tg Is the max gravity torque; /J. is the
Earth's gravity constant (3.986 x 1014 m3!s2);
Ris orbit radius (m), 8 is the maximum deviation
of the Z-axis from local vertical in radians, and
Iz and Iyare moments of inertia about z and y
(or x, if smaller) axes in kg-m2.
o

F1reSat Example

Disturbance
F~rmula

367

TABLE 11-9B_ Example of Worst Case Disturbance Torque Estimates for F1reSat. Magnetic
and aerodynamic disturbances are the largest for this small spacecraft.

o

Solar
Cyclictorque on
Radiation Earth-orlented
vehicle,
constant for
soIar-oriented
vehicle or
pletform

Attitude Determination and Control

11_1

Solar radiation Pressure, 1$p, is highly
dependent on the type of surface being
mUminated. A surface Is either transparent,
absorbent, or a reflector, but most surfaces are
a combination of the three. Reflectors are
classed as diffuse or specular. In general; solar
arrays are absorbers and the spacecraft body is
a reflector. The worst case solar radiation
torque Is

(3)(3.986 x 1014 m3!s2)(3O kg-m2 )sin(2 deg)

19=

(2)(7.078 x 106 m)3

=1.8x10-6N-m

optional target-of-opportunlty:
Tg = 4.4 x 10-5 N-m

Solar Radiation

For a 2 m by 1.5 m spacecraft cross-section, a center-of-solar-prassure to
center-of-mess difference of 0.3 m, Incidence angle of 0 deg and coefficient
of reflectivity of 0.6.

Tsp = (1,367W!m2) (2m x 1.5m) (0.3m) (1 + 0.6) (cos 0 deg) ! (3x 1()8 mls)
= 6.6 X 10-6 N-m

Tsp = F(Cps - cg)
F.
where F=....!.As(1+q)cosl
c
and Fs Is the solar constant, 1,367 W!m2, cis
the speed of fight, 3 x 108 mis, As Is the surface
area, Cps Is the location of the center of solar
prassure, cg Is the center of gravity, q is the
reflectance factor (ranging from 0 to 1, we use
0.6), and lis the angle of Incidence of the Sun.

Magnetic Field

Aerodynarnlc

Cyclic

Constant for
Earih-oriented
vehicles,
variable for
lnertialiy
oriented vehicle

Orbit altitude
o Residual
spacecraft
megnetic
dipole
o Orbit
IncDnation
o

Orbit altitude
o Spacecraft
geometry and
cg location
o

Tm=DB
where Tm Is the magnetic torque on the
spacecraft; D Is the residual dipole of the vehicle
In amp-tum-m2 (A-m 2 ), and Bls the Earth's
megnetic fleld In tesia. B can be approximated
as 2M! R3 for a polar orbit to half that at the
equator. M Is the magnetic moment of the Earth,
7.96 x 1015 tesla-m 3, and Ris the radius from
dipole (Earth) center to spacecraft In m.
Atmospheric density for low orbits varies
slgniflcantiy with solar activity.

Ta = F(cpa- cg) = FL
where F= 0.5 [p Cd AV 2J; Fbelng the force;

Cd the drag coefficient (usually between 2 and
2.5); P the atmospheric density; A. the surface
area; V. the spacecraft velocity; cpa the center
of aerodynamic pressure; and cg the center
of gravity.

Magnetic Field

For R = 7,078 km, a spacecraft magnetic dipole of 1 A-m2" and the worst-.
case polar magnetic fleld, M= 2 (7.96 x 1015 tesla-m3)/(7.078 x 1QB m)3
= 4.5 x 10-5 tesla (= 0.45 gauss)

Tm =1 x 4.5 x 10-5 = 4.5 x 10-5 N-m
Aerodynamics

For mustration purposes we assume a 3 m2 surface, offset from the center
of mass by 0.2 m. In a 7OQ-km orbit the velocity Is '" 7,504 mis, the
atmospheric density (P) Is '" 10-13 kg/m3. For Cd, the drag coefficient,
use 2.0.
F= 112 [(10-13 kg/m3) (2)(3 m2) (7.504 m/s)2] = 1.7 x 10-5 N

T = FL =1.7 X 10-5 N (0.2 m) = 3.4 x 1()-6 N-m
ThIs is small. At a 1OD-km orbit, however, p = 10-9 kg/m3. This results In
T = 3.3 x 10-2 N -m, which Is significant for our small spacecraft.
• Residual magnetic dipoles can range anywhere from 0.1 to > 20 A-m2 depending on the spacecraft's
size and whether any onboard compensation Is provided. On a small-sized, uncompensated vehicle,
1 A -m2 Is typical (1 A -m2 =1,000 pole -em).

The other disturbances on the control system are internal to the spacecraft. Fortunately, we have some control over them. If we find that one is much larger than the
rest, we can respecify it to tighter values_ This change would reduce its significance
but most likely add to its cost or weight Table 11-10 summarizes the common internal
disturbances_ Misalignments in the center of gravity and in thrusters will show up during thrusting only and are corrected in a closed-loop control system. The slosh and
operating machinery torques are of greater concern but depend on specific hardware_
If a spacecraft component has fluid tanks or rotating machinery, the system designer
should investigate disturbance effects and ways to compensate for the disturbance, if
required. Standard techniques include slosh baffles or counter-rotating elements_

368

Spacecraft Subsystems

TABLE 11-10.

11.1

Prlnclpallntemal Disturbance Torques. Spacecraft designers can minimize
Intemal disturbances through careful planning and precise manufaclurlng which
may Increase costs.

Disturbances

Uncertainty In Center
of Gtavity (eg)

Effect on Vehicle
Unb~tcmquesdurlngflrlng
of coupled thrusters

TABLE 11-11.

Typical Values
1 to3cm

Attitude Determination and Control

11.1

Typical ADCS Actuators. Acluator weight and power usually scale with
performance.

Actuator

Thruster MlsaDgnment

Same as cg uncertainty

0.1 to 0.5 deg

Mismatch of
Thruster Outputs

Similar to cg uncertainty

:t5%

Rotating Machinery
(pumps, tape
recorders)

Torques that perturb both

stebDity and accuracy

Dependent on spacecraft design;
may be compensated by counterrotating elements.

Uquid Sloshing

Torques due to fluid motion and
variation in center-of-mass
location

Dependent on specific design;
may be controlled by bladders or
baffles.

Dynamics of
ReXlb/e Bodies

OscIllatory resonance at
bending frequencies, limiting
control bandwidth

Depands on spacecraft strucIure.

Thermal Shocks on
ReXlb/e Appendages

Attitude disturbances when
entering/leaving ecfipse

Depends on spacecraft strucIure.
Worst for gravity gradient systems
with long inertia booms.

11.1.4 Select and Size ADCS Hardware
We are now ready to evaluate and select the individual ADCS components.
. Actua~rs. We flI'St discuss the actuators, ~ summarized in Table II-II, beginning
Wlth reaction and momentum wheels. Reaction wheels are essentially torque motors
with high-inertia rotors. They can spin in either direction, and provide one axis of control for each wheel. Momentum wheels are reaction wheels with a nominal spin rate
above zero to provide a nearly constant angular momentum. This momentum provides
gyroscopic stiffness to two axes, While the motor torque may be controlled to precisely
point around the third axis.
In sizing wheels, it is important to distinguish between cyclic and secular disturbances, and between angular momentum storage and torque authority. For 3-axis
control systems, cyclic torques build up cyclic angular momentum in reaction wheels,
as the wheels provide compensating torques to keep the vehicle from moving. We
typi~y size the angular momentum capacity of a reaction wheel (limited by its
saturation speed) to handle the cyclic storage during an orbit without the need for frequent momentum dumping. Thus, the average disturbance torque for 114 or 112 orbit
determines the minimum storage capability. The secular torques and our total storage
capacity then define how frequently angular momentum must be dumped.
The torque capability of the wheels usually is determined by slew requirements or
the need for control authority above the peak disturbance torque in order for the wheels
to maintain pointing accuracy.
For 3-axis control, at least three wheels are required with their spin axes not
coplanar. Often, a fourth redundant wheel is carried in case one of the three primaries

Typical Performance Range

Weight
(kg)

Power

(W)

ThruSters
0.5 to 9,000 N"

Variablet

NlAf

<5N*

Variablef

NlAt

0.4 to 400 N"m"s for momentum
wheels at 1,200 to 5,000 rpm;
max torques from 0.01 to 1 N·m

2t020

10 to 110

Control Moment Gyros (CMG) 25 to 500 N"m of torque

>10

90 to 150

Magnetic Torquers

0.4 to 50

0.6 to 16

Hot Gas (Hydrazine)
Cold Gas

Unwanted tcmques during
translation thrusting

369

Reaction and
Momentum Wheels

1 to 4,000 A·m2*

• Multiply by moment arm (typlcaHy 1 to 2 m) to get tolQ\l(l.
Chap 17 discusses weight and power for thruster systems In more detail.
For 700-km orbit and maximum Earth field of 0.4 gauss, the maximum torques would be 4.5 x 10-5 N·m to
0.18N·m (see Table 11·9B).

t

fails. If the wheels are not orthogonal (and the redundant one never is), additional
torque and momentum authority may be necessary to compe~~te for the ~fa.vorable
geometry. It is also common to use wheels larger than the mmnnum required m order
to use a standard component
.
For spin-stabilized or momentum-bias systems, the cyclic torques.will ca~ cyclic
rates while the secular torques cause gradual divergence. We typICally desIgn the
stored angular momentum, determined by spin rate and inertia of the spi~g ~y,
to be large enough to keep the cyclic motion within our pointing specification Without
active control during an orbit Periodic torquing will still be required to counte~ct th~
secular disturbances. The more angular momentum in the body, the more reSIstant It
is to external torques. An upper limit on the stored momentum, if one exists, may be
..
.
defined by the fuel cost to precess this angular momentum.
For high-torque applications, control-~ment gyros may.be .used mstead of reaction wheels. These are single- or double-gunbaled wheels spmnmg at constant speed.
By turning the gimbal axis, we can obtain a high-output torque whose size ~epends on
the speed of the rotor and the gimbal rate of rotation. Control systems Wlth control
moment gyros can produce large torques about all three of the spacecraft's ~ogonal
axes so we most often use them for agile (high-rate) maneuvers. They reqwre a complex'controllaw and momentum exchange for desaturation. Other disadvantages are
high cost and weight
Spacecraft also use magnetic torquers as actuatio~ de~ces. These torquers ~
magnetic coils or electromagnets to generate magnetic dipole moments..Magne~c
torquers can compensate for the spacecraft's residual magnetic fields or attitude drift
from minor disturbance torques. They also can desaturate momentum-exchange systems but usually require much more time than thrus~rs. A .magnetic ~uer produces
torque proportional (and perpendicular) to the Earth s varymg magnetic field. Electromagnets have the advantage of no moving parts, requiring only a magnetometer for
field sensing and a wire-wound, electromagnetic rod in .each ~s. Beca~ they use
the Earth's natural magnetic fields, they are less effective at higher orbits. 'V!e ~an
easily specify the rod's field strength in amp'turn·m2 and tailor it t~ any applIcation.
Table 11-12 describes sizing rules of thumb for wheels and magnetic torquers.

370

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.1

TABLE 11-12. Simplified Equations for Sizing Reaction Wheels, Momentum Wheels, and
Magnetic Torquers. AreSat momentum wheels are 'sized for the baseline
requirements. Reaction wheels are sized for the optional design with ~I\.,f_
slew requirement
--'"'II

Parameter

Slmplmed Equations

TorquefTom
Reaction
Wheel for

ReactIon-wheel torque must equal
worst-case anI!cIpaIed disturbance
torque plus some margin:
TRW = (10) (MargIn Factor)

Disturbance
Rejection

Slew Torque

For mex-acceJ8/8tIon sJews
(112 distance In 112 time);

forReaction

Wheels

AppUcatJon to F1reSat Example

For the example spacecraft, To c 4.5 x 10-& N· m
(Table 11·9). ThIs Is below aJmost aU candidate
reactIon wheels. We wID select a wheel based on
storage requirements or slew torque, not disturbance

• Control attitude

• Adjust orbits

For the 3O-deg slews of the 90 kg.m2 spacecraft
(FIg. 11-1) In 10 mIn, this becomes:

• Control nutation

• Control the spin rate

=5.2xl0-4N • m
ThIs Is also a smaO vaJua.

Momentum
S/orageln
Reaction

Wheel

One approach to esIlmatIng wheel
momentum, h, Is to In!egreJe the
worst-case disturbance torque, 10,
over a tuB orbit. If the disturbance Is
gravity gradient, the maximum
dlsIurbance accumulates In 1/4 of an
orbit. A slmpDfled expression for such
a sinusoidal disturbance Is:
h = (To)

0rbItsJ Period
4

(0.707)

where 0.707 Is the rms average of a
sinusoidal function.

Momentum
Storage In
Momentum
Wheel

Momentum
Storage In
Spinner

Torquers

S

h = (4.5 x 10- N.m(

98.~ mIn)(

s::

}0.707)

= 4.7xl0-2N•m• s
A smaO reactIon wheel which gIvas us storage of
0.4 N'm'S would be sufIIcIant. It provides a margIn
of > S In storage for the worst-case torques.

RoD and yaw accuracy depend on the The value of h for a 0.1 deg yaw accuracy would be
wheefs momantlim and the external
disturbance torque. A slmpllffed
expression for the requIred
h= (4.5 x 10-5 N·m) x
sec
momentum storage Is:
O.lx_7E_
P
180 deg
TX4"=h8a
=38.2N·m·s
T=torque
P = orbit period
To Is from Table II-SA.
h=anguJar
Ba = aUowable
momentum
monon
For a 1 deg accuracy, we would need only 3.1t N'm's

1482

Same as for a momentum wheel, but
with the spin rate:
h
(Os =1

Torque from
Magnetlc

For 10 =4.5x 1000N'm (Table II-S8) and a 700-km
orb!taJ period of 98.8 mIn

For the 0.1 deg accuracy, the spin rate Is:
(Os =

(37.3)N·m·s
2

BOkg'm

= 0.42 rad/sec= 4.1r'pm

Magnetic torquers use the Earth's
magnetic field, B, and electrical
current through the torquer to create a
magnetic dipole (D) that results In
torque (7) on the vehicle;

Table II·S8 estImaIas the worst-case Earth field, B to
be 4.5 x 10-& tasIa. We caIcuJaIe the torque rod's '
magnetic torquIng abJIIty (dipole) to counteract the
worst-case gravity gradJant dlsIurbance, To, of
4.5 x 10-& N'm as

0=1:
B

4.5xl0-5 N •m
0=1:=
=IA'm2
B 4.5 x 10-5 tesIe

Magnets used for momantum ~
Ing must equaJ the peak disturbance +
margin to compensate for the lack of
compIeIe dIrecUonaJ control

which Is a smaD actuator. The Earth's field Is cycDc at
Iwlce orb!taJ frequency; thus, maxImum torque Is
avaIIeble only Iwlce per orbit. Atorquer of 3 to 10 A' m2

capacity should provide sufIlcJant margin.
sizing, the magnIIude and dlrecIIon of the dlsIurbance torques nwst be considered. In partlcuIaJ:
momantum accurnuJatIon In fneltlaJ coordlnates nwst be mapped to body-tixed wheel axes. where necessary. ,

Note; For actuator

371

Gas jets or thrusters produce torque by expelling mass, and are not governed by the
same concerns as momentum storage devices. We consider them to be a hot-gas
system, either bipropellant or monopropellant, when a chemical reaction produceS the
energy. They are a cold-gas system when energy comes from the latent heat of a phase
change or from the work of compression without a phase change. Cold-gas systems
usually apply to small spacecraft and low-impulse requirements.
Thrusters produce torques and forces that:

rejecllon. See below.

T=48!.. = 4x30 degx(7E/I80 deg)x90kg'm2
f
(600sec)2

!=.!1:(!-r
2 21 2

Attitude Determination and Control

11.1

•

~aneuverspacecraft

over large angles

• Dump extra momentum from a momentum
wheel, reaction wheel, or control moment gyro

Unfortunately, their plumes may impinge on the spacecraft, contaminating surfaces,
and they require expendable propellant, dictating spacecraft life. An advantage is that
they can provide large, instantaneous torques at any point in the orbit
We must decide whether we need thrusters, how many we need, and where to locate
them. For applications that demand fine control from the thrusters, we may have to
specify the minimum impulse from a single thruster pulse--usually 20 ms or greater.
Single thrust levels are usually used, unless the complication of dual or variable thrust
is required.
Although the baseline FrreSat spacecraft will use magnetic torquers, we illustrate
the thruster sizing calculations for momentum dumping and the optional slew requirement We will assume the thruster's moment arm is 0.5 m. Table 11-13 gives procedures and simplified equations, where applicable, for sizing thrusters and estimating
propellant. Refer to Chap. 17 for a thorough discussion of propulsion subsystems.
The size of the thrusters and required propellent are small for this example. For the
optional system with reaction wheels, slewing can be accomplished with the wheels,
avoiding use of propellent For the baseline momentum bias system, we would use
thrusters for the optional slews, though large electromagnets could be used if thrusters
were not available and maneuver time were not important.
Sensors. We complete this hardware unit by selecting the sensors needed for
control. Consult Table 11-14 for a summary of typical devices, as well as their performance and physical characteristics. Note, however, that sensor technology is evolving
rapidly, promising more accurate, lighter-weight sensors for future mission. .
Sun sensors are visible-light detectors which measme one or two angles between
their mounting base and incident sunlight They are popular, accurate and reliable, but
require clear fields of view. They can be used as part of the nonnaI attitude determination system, part of the initial acquisition or failure recovery system, or part of an
independent solar array orientation system. Since most low-Earth orbits inclllde
eclipse periods, Sun-sensor-based attitude determination systems must provide some
way of tolerating the regular loss of this data without violating pointing constraints.
Sun sensors can be quite accurate « 0.01 deg) but it is not always possible to take
advantage of that feature. We usually mount Sun sensors near the ends of the vehicle
to obtain an unobstructed field of view. Sun sensor accuracy can be limited by structural bending on large spacecraft. Spinning satellites use specially designed Sun sensors that measure the angle of the Sun with respect to the spin axis of the vehicle. The
data may be sent to the ground for processing or used in a closed-loop control system
on board the vehicle.

372
TABLE 11-13.

Spacecraft Snbsystems

11.1

Simplified Equations for Preliminary Sizing of Thruster Systems. FireSat
thruster requirements are small for this low-dlsturbance, minimal slew
appncatlon.

Slmpllfled Equations
Application to RreSat Example
Thruster force level sizing for For the worst case To of 4.5 x10-5 N'm (Table 11-7) and a
external disturbances:
thruster moment arm of 0.5 m
F= ToIL

-5·

F= 4.5x10 N·m=9.0x10-5N
Fis thruster force, To Is worst0.5m
case disturbance torques, and
L Is the thruster's moment arm ThIs small value Indicates slewing rate; not disturbances, will
more likely determine size. Also, using thrusters to fight cyclic
disturbances uses much fuel.
Sizing force level to meet
slew rates (optional zero
momentum system):
Determine highest slew rate
required In the mission profile.

Assume a 3O-cIeg slew In less than 1 min (60 sec),
accelerating for 5% of that time, coasting for 9OOk, and
decelerating for 5%. .
Rate (9) = 30 deg/60 sec =0.5 deg/sec

To reach 0.5 deg/s In 5% of 1 min, which is 3 sec, requires an
Develop a profile that
accelerates the vehicle to that acceleration
rate, coasts, then decelerates.
We calculate the thruster force (8) = ~ - 0.5 deg/sec = 0.167 deg/sec2 = 2.91 x 10-3 radlsec2
from the acceleration value
t
3sec
using the fonowing
2
relationships:
F 16 (90 kg-m )(2.91x10-3 radlsec2 ) _ 0.52 N
L
0.5m
T=FL=18
This is smaH but feasible.
Solve for F

11.1

Attitude Determination and Control

TABLE 11-13.

Slmpllfled Equations for Preliminary Sizing of Thruster Systems.
(Continued) FireSat thruster requirements are small for this low-dlsturbance,
minimal slew application.

Simplified Equations

T= FLd=hW
where
F = average thruster force
L = moment arm
d = thruster duty cycle
(fraction of spin period)
h = angular momentum
It) = slew rate
Thruster pulse life:
Develop detailed maneuver
profile from mission sequence
of events and determine pulse
number and length for each
segment

7t_
(382N.m.S)( 3Odeg)x __
600 sec
180 deg
Ld
(0.5 m)(0.1)
= 0.67 N

= hID

Application to FlreSat Example

Sizing force level for
momentum dumping:

For FireSat with 0.4 N·m·s wheels and 1-sec burns,
F-

F=.E.
U
where
h = stored momentum
(from wheel capecity or
disturbance torque x time)
L = moment arm
t=bumtime
Propellant
Estimate propellant mass (Mp)
by determining the total purse
length, t. for the pulses counted
above, multiplying by thruster
force (F), and dMdlng by
specific impulse (lspl, and g as
follows:

R
Mp=Ispg

0.4 N'm's
= 0.8 N
(0.5 m) x (1 sec)

To derive the propellant weight from the pulses above, use
3 sec for on-time for each large maneuver pulse, and 1 sec for
each momentum-dump pulse at the computed force levels
(actual times will change when a thruster Is chosen, but the
total Impulse will be the same).
Total impulse = 1=
240 pulses 3 sec/pulse 0.52 N
+ 5,475 pulses x 1 sec/pulse x 0.8 N
=4,754N's
then

I
Mp=Ispg

Sizing force level for slewing For FireSat, allowing 10 min for a 3O-deg slew, with 100k duty
a momentum-blas vehicle:
cycle
The applied torque T Is

4,754N's
= 2.43 kg
200secx9.8m/sec2

where an Isp of 200 sec for hydrazlne Is a conservative
estimate.
TABLE 11-14. Typical ADCS Sensors. Sensors have continued to Improve in performance
while getting smaller and less expensive.
Sensor

Typical Performance Range

Inertial
Gyro drift rate = 0.003 deg/hrto 1 deg/hr,
Measurement Unit
accel.
(Gyros & Accelerometers) Unearity = 1 to 5 x 1O~ glg2 over range
of2Oto60g
Assume example spacecraft uses thrusters only for large
mission maneuvers and momentum dumping for 1 sec each
wheel once a day. The large maneuver, 30 deg, In 2 axes each
week includes a 3-sec acceleration pulse and a 3-sec
deceleration pulse.

373

Sun Sensors

Accuracy = 0.005 deg to 3 deg

Star Sensors

Attitude accuracy = 1 arc sec to 1 arc min
0.0003 deg to 0.01 deg

(Scanners & Mappers)

WtRange
(kg)

Power
(W)

1 to 15

1010200

0.1 to2

Ot03

2to5

5to20

Attitude accuracy:
0.1 deg to 1 deg (LEO)

x 12/yr x 5 yr (maneuver)

Horizon Sensors
• ScannerlPipper
• Fixed Head (Static)

< 0.1 deg to 025 deg

1to4
0.5 to 3.5

5to 10
0.3t05

+ 1 pulse x 3 wheels x 365 days/yr x 5 yr

Magnetometer

Attitude accuracy = 0.5 deg to 3 deg

0.3 to 12

<1

Total Pulses = 2 pulses (start & stop) x 2 axes

(momentum dump)
= 240 + 5,475 = 5,715 pulses
This Is below the typical 20,000 to 50,000 pulse ratings for
small thrusters.

Star sensors have evolved rapidly in the past few years, and represent the most
common sensor for high-accuracy missions. Star sensors can be scanners or trackers.
Scanners are
on spinning spacecraft. Stars pass through multiple slits in a scan-

used

374

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.1

ner's field of view. After several star crossings, we can derive the vehicle's attitude.
We use trackers on 3-axis attitude stabilized spacecraft to track one or more stars to
derive 2- or 3-axis attitude infonnation. The most sophisticated units not only track the
stars as bright spots, but identify which star pattern they are viewing, and output the
sensor's orientation compared to an inertial reference. Putting this software inside the
sensor .simplifies processing requirements of the remaining attitude control software.
While star sensors excel in accuracy, care is required in their specfication and use.
For example, the vehicle must be stabilized to some extent before the trackers can
det~e where they point This stabilization may require alternate sensors, which
can mcrease total system cost. Also, star sensors are susceptible to being blinded by
the Sun, Moon, or even planets, which must be accommodated in their application.
Where the mission requires the highest accuracy and justifies a high cost, we use a
C?mbination of star trackers and gyros. These two sensors complement each other
mcely: the gyros can be used for initial stabilization. and during periods of sun or
moon interference in the trackers, while the trackers can be used to provide a highaccuracy, low frequency, external reference unavailable to the gyros. Work continues
to improve the sample rate of star trackers and to reduce their radiation sensitivity.
Horizon sensors are infrared devices that detect the contrast betWeen the cold of
deep space and the heat of the Earth's atmosphere (about 40 km above the surface in
the sensed band). Simple narrow field-of-view fixed-head types (called pippers or
horizon crossing indicators) are used on spinning spacecraft to measure Earth phase
and chord angles ~hich, together with orbit and mounting geometry, define two angles
to the Earth (nadir) vector. Scanning horizon sensors use a rotating mirror or lens to
~place (or augment) the spinning spacecraft body. They are often used in pairs for
lDlproved performance and redundancy. Some nadir-pointing spacecraft use staring
sensors which view the entire Earth disk' (from GEO) or a portion of the limb (from
LEO). The sensor fields of view stay fixed with respect to the spacecraft. This type
works best for circular orbits.
Horizon sensors provide Earth-relative information directly for Earth-pointing
spacecraft, which may simplify onboard processing. The scanning types require clear
fields o~ view for their ~an con~ (typically 45,60, or 90 deg, half-angle). Typical
~CCuraCles for systems usmg honzon sensors are 0.1 to 0.25 deg, with some applicabons approaching 0.03 deg. For the highest accuracy in low-Earth orbit, it is necessary
to correct the data for Earth oblateness and seasonal horizon variations.
Magnetometers are simple, reliable, lightweight sensors that measure both the
direction and size of the Earth's magnetic field. When compared to the Earth's known
field, their output helps us establish the spacecraft's attitude. But their accuracy is not
as good as that of star or horizon references. The Earth's field can shift with time and
is not known precisely in the fIrst place. To improve accuracy, we often combine their
data with data from Sun or horizon sensors. When a vehicle using magnetic torquers
passes through magnetic-field reversals during each orbit, we use a magnetometer to
control the polarity of the torquer output The torquers usually must be turned off while
the magnetometer is sampled to avoid corrupting the measurement.
GPS r~ceivers are commonly known as high-accuracy navigation devices. Recently,
~PS receIvers have been used for attitude determination by employing the differential
SIgnalS from separate antennas on a spacecraft. Such sensors offer the promise of low
cost and weight for LEO missions, and are being used in low accuracy applications or
~ !>ack-up sensors. Development continues to improve their accuracy, which is
limited by the separation of the antennas, the ability to resolve small phase differences,

11.1

Attitude Determination and Control

375

the relatively long wavelength, and multipath effects due to reflections off spacecraft
components.
Gyroscopes are inertial sensors which measure the speed or angle of rotation from
an initial reference, but without any knowledge of an external, absolute reference. We
use them in spacecraft for precision attitude sensing when combined with external
references such as star or sun sensors, or, for brief periods, for nutation damping or
attitude control during thruster firing. Manufacturers use a variety of physical
phenomena, from simple spinning wheels (iron gyros using ball or gas bearings) to
ring lasers, hemispherical resonating surfaces, and laser fiber optic bundles. The gyro
manufacturers, driven by aircraft markets, steadily improve accuracy while reducing
size and mass.
Error models for gyroscopes vary with the technology, but characterize the deterioration of attitude knowledge with time (degrees per hour or per square-root of time).
When used with an accurate external reference, such as star trackers, gyros can provide
smoothing (filling in the measurement gaps between star tracker samples) and higher
frequency information (tens to hundreds of hertz), while the star trackers provide the
low frequency, absolute orientation information that the gyros lack. Individual gyros
provide one or two axes of infonnation, and are often grouped together as an Inertial
Reference Unit, IRU, for three full axes. IRUs with accelerometers added for positionlvelocity sensing are called Inertial Measurement Units, IMUs.
Sensor selection. Sensor selection is most directly influenced by the required
orientation of the spacecraft (e.g., Earth- or inertial-pointing) and its accuracy. Other
influences include redundancy, fault tolerance, field of view requirements, and available data rates. Typically, we identify candidate sensor suites and conduct a trade
study to determine the best, most cost-effective approach. In such studies, the existence of off-the-shelf components and software can strongly influence the outcome. In
this section we will only briefly describe some selection guidelines.
Full 3-axis knowledge requires at least two external vector measurements, although
we use inertial platforms or spacecraft angular momentum (from spinning or momentum wheels) to hold the attitude between external measurements. In some cases, if
attitude knowledge can be held for a fraction of an orbit, the external vectors (e.g.,
Earth or magnetic) will have moved enough to provide the necessary infonnation.
For Earth-pointed spacecraft, horizon sensors provide a direct measurement of
pitch and roll axes, but require augmentation for yaw measurements. Depending on the
accuracy required, we 'use Sun sensors, magnetometers, or momentum-bias control
relying on roll-yaw coupling for the third degree of freedom. For inertially-pointing
spacecraft, star and Sun sensors provide the most direct measurements, and inertial
platforms are ideally suited. Frequently, only one measurement is made in the ideal
coordinate frame (Earth or inertial), and the spacecraft orbit parameters are required
in order to convert a second measurement or as an input to a magnetic field model. The
parameters are usually uplinked to the spacecraft from ground tracking, but autonomous navigation systems using GPS are also in use (see Sec. 11.1).
Fu-eSat sensors. The external sensors for FrreSat could consist of any of the types
identified. For the 0.1 deg Earth-relative pointing requirement, however, horizon sensors are the most obvious choice since they directly measure two axes we need to
control. The accuracy requirement makes a star sensor a strong candidate as well,
although its infonnation needs to be transfoJmed to Earth-relative pointing for our use.
The 0.1 deg accuracy is at the low end of horizon sensors' typical performance, and
we need to be careful to get the most out of their data.

376

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.1

TABLE 11·15. F1reSat Spacecraft Control Components Selection. A slmple,low-cost suite
of components fits FlreSafs needs.
Type

Components

Actuation
Devices

(1) Momentum Wheel

RatIonale
• PHch axis torquing
• Roll and yaw axis passive stability

(3) 8ectromagnets

• Roll and yaw control
• Pitch wheel desaturatlon

Horizon Sensor

• Provide basic pitch and roD reference
• Can meet 0.1 deg accuracy
• Lower weight and cost than star sensors

Sun Sensors

• Initially acquire vehicle attitude from unknown
orientation
• Coarse attitude data
• FIne data for yaw

Sensors

Magnetometer

• Coarse yaw data

Attitude Determination and Control

11.1

377

At this point, we consider the value of an inertial reference package. Such packages,
although heavy and expensive, provide a short-term attitude reference which would
emit the Earth vector data to be used for full 3-axis knowledge over an orbit. A gyro
=ckage would also reduce the single-measure~ent accuracy required of the horiz~n
sensors, simpIifying their selection an~ processmg. Su~h packages ~ ats.o useful m
the control system if fast slews are required. Although mce to have, an mertial package
does not seem warranted for FtreSat. Table 11-15 summarizes our hardware selections.
Once the hardware selection is complete, it must be documented for use by other
system and subsystem designers as follows:
• Specify the power levels and weights for each assembly
• Establish the electrical interface to the outside world
• Describe requirements for mounting, alignment, heating, or coding

• Determine what telemetry data we must process
• Document how much software we need to support equations of motion

TABLE 11·16. FlreSat Spacecraft Control Subsystem Characterized. The baseline ADCS
components satisfy all mission reqUirements, with thrusters available if required.
Components

Weight
(kg)

Type

Momentum
Wheel

Mid-size, 40 N·m·s
momentum

Electromagnets

3,10 A·m2
capacity each
4 wide-angle coarse
sensors providing
4 1£ steradian
coverage;
'" 0.1 deg accuracy

Horizon
Sensors

Scanning type (2)
plus electronics;
0.1 deg accuracy

Stotal

Hydrazine;
O.S Nforce

Propellant
weight depends
on mission

Thrusters
Magnetometer

3-axIs

(W)

Mounting
ConSiderations

< S total, with
10 to 20 Momentum vector
drive electronics
on pitch axis
2, Including
Sto 10 Orthogonal configuration
current drive
best to reduce crosselectronics
coupling
< 1total
02S
Free of viewing
obstructions and
reflections

Sun Sensors

Optional

Power

<1

10

NlA

S

Unobstructed view of
Earth's horizon
Alignments and moment
arm to center of gravity
are critical
Need to isolate
magnetometer from
electromagnets, either
physically or by dutycycIi~ the magnets.

We assume we also need a yaw sensor capable of 0.1 deg, and this choice is less
obvious. (Often, it is useful to question a tight yaw requirement. Many payloads, e.g.,
antennas, some cameras, radars, are not sensitive to rotations around their pointing
axis. For this discussion, we will assume the requirement is fum.) We could use sun
sensors, but their data needs to be replaced during eclipses. Magnetometers don't have
the necessary accuracy on their own, but with our momentum-bias system, roll-yaw
coupling, and some yaw filtering, a magnetometer-Sun sensor system should work.

Specific numbers depend on the vendors selected. A typical list for FtreSat might look
like Table 11-16, but the numbers could vary considerably with only slight changes in
subsystem accuracies or slewing requirements.
ADeS Vendors. Typical suppliers for ADCS components are listed in Table 11-17.
TABLE 11·17. ADCS Component Suppliers. Aerospace mergers can result In sudden name
changes.
Actuators

Sensors

Company
Adcole Corporation
AlDedSlgnaI
BaD Aerospace and
Technologies Corp.
BDIlngsley Magnetics
CAL Corporation
EDO (Barnes) Corp.
HoneyweD Space Systems
Ithaco Space Systems Inc.
Kear10tt Guidance &
Navigation Corporation
LilIon Industries
Lockheed Marlin
KaIser Marquardt Corp.
Malia MarconI Space
Mads, Inc.
MIcrocosm, Inc.
Primex TecImoIogies
Raytheon Systems, Inc.
Se!vo Corp. of AmerIca
SmIths Industries
Defense Systems
TeldlxGmbH·
TRW
Watson Industries, Inc.

Momentuml
Magnet~ ThrusInertial Reaction
Wheels
CMGs magnets tars
SUn Earth ometers Star (Gyros)
tI'
tI'
tI'
tI'
tI'
tI'
tI'
tI'

tI'

tI'

tI'

tI'
tI'
tI'

tI'
tI'
tI'

tI'
tI'

tI'
tI'

tI'

tI'
tI'
tI'
tI'
tI'
tI'
tI'
tI'
tI'
tI'
tI'

tI'

378

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.1

11.1.5 Define the Control Algorithms

Fmally, we must tie all of the control components together into a cohesive system.
We begin wi~ a block diagram for a single-axis control system (See Fig. 11-3). As We
re~ the destgn, we add or modify feedback loops for rate and altitude data, define
gams and .co~ts, ~d fine tune t!te equations of motion. To do so, we need good
mathematical SlDlUlations of the entire system. including internal and external disturbances: Usually, linear differential equations with constant coefficients describe the
dptamtcs of a control system. thus allowing us to analyze·its performance with the
highly ~veloped tools of linear servomechanism theory. With these same tools we
can easily do linear compensation to satisfy specifications for performance.
'
NoISe

Time

Sensor
Dynamics

DIstuJbances

Ag. 11-3. Diagram of a Typical AttHude Control System with Control Along a Single Axis.
Control algorithms are usually implemented In an onboard processor and analyzed
with detailed sImulations.

11.1

Attitude Determination and Control

Tbree-axis stabilization. Different types of active control systems have different
key parameters and algorithms. Frequently, 3-axis control can be decoupled into three
independent axes. The most basic design parameter in each axis is its position gain,
K ." This is the amount of control torque which results from a unit attitude error and
be expressed in N·m/deg or N·m/rad. The position gain is selected by the designer
and must be high enough to provide the required attitude control accuracy in the
presence of disturbances, or Kp ~ TDlfJe> where Kp is position gain, TD is peak disturbance torque, and fJe is allowable attitude error.
The value of the position gain also determines the attitude control system bandwidth and speed-of-response. The bandwidth is given by (()n =(Kp II)IIl, where 1 is the
spacecraft moment of inertia. The bandwidth defines the frequency at which control
authority begins to diminish. Attitude control and disturbance rejection are effective
from 0 frequency (d.c.) up to the bandwidth. Speed o/response is approximately the
reciprocal of bandwidth. Note that position gain is inversely proportional to allowable
error and bandwidth is proportional to the square root of position gain. Therefore, high
accuracy implies high position gain and high bandwidth. However, high bandwidth
may cause bending resonances to affect control system performance.
With the relations given, the system designer can estimate required position gain
from his estimates of disturbance torque and accuracy requirements. He can use this
estimate to compute control system bandwidth. This allows him to specify minimum
bending frequencies as discussed below.
In defining algorithms for the control system, we must also consider whether the
vehicle will have flexible-body effects that can make the vehicle unstable. Spacecraft
with flexible appendages such as antennas, booms, and solar panels may produce
slight warping at their natural frequencies. Control torques and external-disturbance
torques will cause structural vibrations, in some cases close to or within the control
system's bandwidth. The lowest natural frequencies of flexible components should be
at least an order of magnitude greater than the rigid-body frequencies before we can
neglect flexibility. For further discussion of how structural flexibility affects the
control subsystem, see Sec. 3.12 of Agrawal [1986].
Spin stabilization and momentum bias. The fundamental concept in spin stabilization is the nutation frequency of the vehicle. For a spinning body, the inertial
nutation frequency «(()m) is equal to

ck

Is
I

(l) • = - ( ( )

m

!Ie typically apply linear theory only to preliminary analysis and design. As the
~eslgn matures, nonlinear effects come strongly into play. These effects may be
inherent or intentionally introduced to improve the system's performance. Feedback
con~l systems are of two kinds, ~ased on th: flow of their control signals. They are
c0n1!nuous-tiata systems when theIr control Signals flow continuously without interruption; they are sampled-data systems when sampling occurs at equal intervals. Most
modern spacecraft process data through digital computers and therefore use control
systems that sample data.
.Although it is beyond the scope of this handbook to provide detailed design
gw~ce on feedba~k control systems, the system designer should recognize the interacting effects of attitude control system loop gain, capability of the attitude control
system to co~pensate for disturbances, accuracy of attitude control, and control
system bandWidth.

371)

s

(11-1)

T

where Is is the spin axis inertia, IT is the transverse axis inertia, and (()s is the spin
frequency.
For a momentum-bias vehicle with a stable body and a momentum wheel (or a dualspin vehicle with a stable platform and a spinning rotor), the nutation frequency is
h

(() . = m IT

(11-2)

• In its simplest form, a spacecraft attitude control system ~ be represented in s-domain as a
111/ plant and may be controlled by a proportionol plus derivative (PD) controller where
Tc e Kp 8£ + K,r 8e •·The position gain, Kp' controls system bandwidth and the rate gain, K,..
controls dampmg.

380

spacecraft Subsystems

11.1

where h is the angular momentum of the spinning body. Thus, spaceCraft with large
inertias and small wheels have small nutation frequencies (Le.. long periods).
Attempting to move the vehicle with a bandwidth faster than the nutation frequency
causes it to act more like a 3-axis vehicle. In general, we attempt to control near the
nutation frequency or slower, with correspondingly small torques. In this area, the
vehicle acts like a gyroscope, with the achieved angular rate, W, proportional to the
applied torque, T:

w;. TIh

(11-3)

where h is the system angular momentum.
A lower limit on control bandwidth is usually provided by the orbit rate W , which
for a circular orbit is
0
(11-4)

where J1 =3.986 x 1014 m3/s2 and r is the orbit"radius.
Attitude determination. A full discussion of determination algorithms requires a
dedicated reference such as Wertz [1978]. We will highlight only some of the basic
concepts.
The basic algorithms for determination depend on the coordinate frames of interest
(e.g.. the sensor frames, local vertical frame, or Earth-centered inertial frame), and the
geometry of the measurements, parameterized by Euler angles (such as roll, pitch, and
yaw) or quatemions (which are scaled vectors for Eigen-axis rotations of coordinate
frames). Inertial platforms and star sensor data usually are suited to inertial quaternions, while Earth-pointing spacecraft often use a local-vertical, aircraft-like set of
Euler angles.
Simple spacecraft may use the sensor readings directly for control, while more
complex vehicles or those with higher accuracy requirements employ some form of
averaging, smoothing, or Kalman filtering of the data. The exact algorithms depend on
the vehicle properties, orbit, and sensor types used.
FireSat algorithms. For our momentum-bias FrreSat example, control separates
into pitch-axis control using torque commands to the momentum wheel, and roll-yaw
control using current commands to the electromagnets. The pitch-wheel desaturation
commands must also be fed (at a slow rate) to the magnets. The pitch-wheel control is
straightforward, using proportional-plus derivative and, optionally, integral control.
The roll-yaw control design starts by using the linearized nutation dynamics of the
system, and is complicated by the directional limitations of electromagnetic torque
(the achievable torque is perpendicular to the instantaneous Earth magnetic field).
The nadir-oriented control system may use an Earth-referenced, aircraft-like Euler
angle (roll, pitch, yaw) set, although quaternions should also be considered for their
lack of singularities during off-nominal pointing. The horizon sensors directly read
two of the angles of interest, pitch and roll. Yaw needs to be measured directly from
SliD position (during orbit day) or from the magnetometer readings (using a stored
model of the Earth's field), or inferred from the roll-yaw coupling descnOed earlier.
The magnetic field and Sun information require an uplinked set of orbit parameters,
and increase the computational requirements of the subsystem. Overall, meeting the
0.1. deg yaw requireD?ent when the Sun is not visible will be the toughest challenge
facmg the ADCS deSIgner, and a form of coasting through the blackouts, without direct roll-yaw control, may be most appropriate.

11.2

Telemetry~ Tracking,

and Command

381

11.2 Telemetry, Tracking, and Command
Douglas Kirkpatrick, United Stotes Air Force Academy
Adapted from SMAD n, Sec. 11.2 "Communications," by John Ford
The telemetry, tracking, and commond (1T&C) or communications subsystem
provides the interface between the spacecraft and ground systems. Payload mission
data and spacecraft housekeeping data pass from the spacecraft through this subsystem
to operators and users at the operations center. Operator commands also pass to the
spacecraft through this subsystem to control the spacecraft and to operate the payload.
We must design the hardware and their functions to pass the data reliably for all the
spacecraft's operating modes. For a discussion of how we collect and manipulate
housekeeping and payload data, see Sec. 11.3, Chap. 9, and Chap. 16. Chapter 13
discusses the communication link design, and Morgan and Gordon [1989] provide a
wealth of information on spacecraft communications.
The subsystem functions include the following:
• Carrier tracking (lock onto the ground station signal)
• Command reception and detection (receive the uplink signal and process it)
• Telemetry modulation and transmission (accept data from spacecraft systems,
process them, and transmit them)
• Ranging (receive, process, and transmit ranging signals to determine the satellite's position)
• Subsystem operations (process subsystem data, maintain its own health and
status, point the antennas, detect and recover faults.)
Table 11-18 presents specific subfunctions to accomplish these main functions.
Subsystem designers must ensure that all of these functions operate reliability to
accomplish the spacecraft mission.
As part of carrier tracking, most satellite IT&C subsystems generate a downlink
RF signal that is phase coherent to the uplink signal. Phase coherence means that we
transmit the downlink carrier so its phase synchronizes with the received phase of the
uplink carrier. This process is the coherent turnaround or two-way-coherent mode.
The coherent turnaround process creates a downlink carrier frequency precisely offset
from the uplink carrier by a predefined numerical turnaround ratio. This is the ratio of
the downlink carrier frequency to the uplink carrier frequency.This operational mode
can only exist when the transmitter phase-locks to the received uplink carrier. For a
given uplink signal, the downlink signal has a constant phase difference. For NASA's
GSIDN-compatible transponders, the receiver downcoverts the uplink carrier, and
creates a voltage such that the receiver's voltage-controlled oscillator runs at precisely
21221 times the uplink carrier frequency. The oscillator frequency goes to the transmitter which multiplies it by a factor of 120. Therefore, the composite transmitter
downlink is 120 x 21221 =2401221 times the uplink frequency, which is the turnaround ratio for NASA-compatible transponders. The turnaround ratio for transponders compatible with SGLS is 256/205. The two-way-coherent mode allows the
ground station to know more exactly the downlink signal's frequency and to measure
the Doppler shift, from which it computes the range rate or line-of-sight velocity
between the spacecraft and the tracking antenna. This knowledge allows operators to

382

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.2

TABLE 11·18. What a TT&C Subsystem Does. These are the functions of a communications
subsystem connecting the sateDIte to the ground or other sateDItes. In a broad
sense the communications subsystem receives sl~ from Earth or another
sateRfte and transmits signals to Earth or another satelflte.
Specific Functions
• CarrIer Tracking
- 2-way coherent communication (downlink frequency Is a ratio of the uplink frequency)
- 2-way noncoherent communication
- l-way communication
• Command Reception and Detection
- Acquire and track uplink carrier
- Demodulate carrier and subcarrfer
- Derive bit timing and detect data bits .
- Resolve data-phase ambiguity if It exists
- Forward command data, clock, and In-lock indicator to the subsystem for command
and data handling
• Telemetry Modulation and TransmIssIon
- Receive telemetry data streams from the command and data handHng subsystem or data
storage subsystem
- Modulate downDnk subcarrfer and carrier with mission or science telemetry
- Transmit composite signal to the ground station or relay satellite
• RangIng
- Detect and retransmit ranging pseudorandom code or ranging tone signals .- Retransmit either phase coherently or noncoherently
• Subsystem Operations
- Receive commands from the subsystem for command and data handling
- Provide health and status telemetry to the C&DH subsystem
- Perform antenna pointing for any antenna requiring beam steering
- Perform mission sequence operations per stored software sequence
- Autonomously select omni-antenna when spacecraft attitude Is lost
- Autonomously detect faults and recover communications using stored software sequence

11.2

Telemetry, Tracking, and Command

383

D pending on the communication standard. the ground station modulates a pseudora:dom code, tones, or both onto the command uplink signal. The TT&C sub?stem's
eiver detects the code or tones andretransmits them on the telemetry carner back
recthe ground station. From the turnaround time of the ranging code or tones tmveling
~o and from the spacecraft. the system determines the range. If the downlink carrier s
~ase is coherent with the uplink carrier ~two-w~y ~herent mode), we ~an measure
~e Doppler-frequency shift on t!te downlink carner SIgnal ~~ th~ obt:nn range-mte
·nformation. Pointing information from the ground station s directional antenna
:.nows us to determine the satellite's azimuth and elevation angles.
. .
Under subsystem opemtions. the IT&C subsystem perfo~ B?tenna ~mting ~or
any antenna that requires beam steering. Closed-loop antenna'p0mting reqwres ~
autotmcking equipment. This equipment g~emtes error Signals for the gw~ce.
navigation. and control subsystem. so it can pomt the ante~. M~~pulse and ~mcal­
scan systems are the most common ways of genemtt.ng pomting error .Slgnals.
Monopulse systems use a monopulse feed that genemtes difference patterns WIth nulls
on the axis of the azimuth and elevation planes. C?nical-scan systems ro!"te m.e received beam about its axis by a small angle. The nse and fall o~ the received Sl~al
amplitude per revolution indi~tes ~e pointin~ error. By ~orrelating the feed poslti()n
with the position where the Signal IS at maxunum amplitude, the system generates
error signals for the control subsystem to point the ~te~ Y'e can use ?pen:loop
antenna pointing when we know the spacecraft antenna s poSItion and the direction to
the receiver station.
Also under subsystem opemtions. the TT&C subsystem may do sequences of
mission commands or respond to autonomous commands. such as putting itself in a
safe mode and routing the omni-antenna to the active receiver. For certain failure
scenarios, the subsystem may also execute fault-detection and recovery operations
through a stored software sequence.
To create a robust TT&C subsystem. we must consider and satisfy three parts of
satellite design: requirements, constraints,. and regula~o~. !he ~~ments come
from a variety of sources and form the basIS for the JDlSSlon m which this subsystem
plays a key role. Typically IT&C requirements include:
• Type of signals (voice. television, and data)
• Capacity (number of channels and bandwidth)

scan fewer frequencies and thus. acquire the spacecraft more quickly. Deep-space

imaging. data collection. and low-Earth orbit spacecraft best illustrate this advantage.
These spacecraft typically have large volumes of data and a short field-of-view time
to the ground station. To receive maximum data at the ground station on a direct downlink at the spacecraft· s highest mte. opemtors must acquire the downlink signal in the
minimum time. Also. if they use ranging for navigation. t\ley can calculate range-mte
information from the Doppler shift of the coherent signal.
Occasionally a TT&C subsystem. opemting in the two-way coherent mode. loses
lock on the uplink signal. At this point. the spacecraft·s transmitter autonomously
changes the references for the downlink carrier from the receiver s voltage-controlled
oscillator to the subsystem's master oscilIator. This process creates a unique downlink
frequency which is no longer synchronous with the uplink carrier. This TT&C mode
is two-way noncoherent communications:
For the ranging function (i.e.• determining the range or line-of-sight distance), the
ground station may use the ranging method of navigation to tmck a spacecraft.

• Covemge area & ground site locations (local. regional, national, international)
• Link signal strength (usually derived from ground terminal type)
• Connectivity (crosslinks. relay ground stations. and direct links)
• Availability (link times per day and days per year, outage times)
• Lifetime (mission duration)
See Sec. 11.2.1 for a more thorough discussion of requirements.
.
Constraints are limits on the IT&C subsystem from various sources. Power
constmints come from sizing the spacecraft and the power source (primary batteries,
solar panels and secondary batteries. or mdioisotope thermoelectric generator). Mass
constraints arise from the mass budget. which comes from the mission design and the
chosen launch vehiCle. The launch vehicle generally limits the total dimensions and
mass. so individual subsystems receive their allocation within those limits. The launch

384

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.2

vehicle choice also sets the launch vibration and acoustic environment, which places
constraints on the fragility of the subsys~m. The interference environment further
~onstrains the ~bsystem. When we choose the orbit, we also set the surrounding
mterference enVlIOllIllent. The owners and developers place cost limits on the total
d~gn, which in tmn limits each subsystem. These cost constraints typically determme how much new technology and subsystem margin that designers can consider.
Many other constraints may arise during design, depending on the mission and the
people involved.
. ~or the IT&C subsystem, international law.and regulatory agencies impact design
significantly. Because all spacecraft commumcate with users and operators on the
ground, de-conflicting frequencies, orbital locations, and power levels are critical to
civilized sharing of limited resources. So, we must apply to the regulatory bodies· for:

• Desired communication frequencies (depending on the mission data rate
transmission power available, and altitude)
,

11.2

Telemetry, Tracking, and Command

TABLE 11-19. TT&C Subsystem Requirements. These are typical system-level requirements
that are Imposed on the TT&C subsystem. See also Table 11-23. (Courtesy of
TRW)
RequIrement
Data Rates
Command
Health & status
telemetry

AJternatJyelConslderaUons

The main regulatory agency enforcing standards is the International Telecommunications Union (ITU), which is now part of the United Nations. Within the nu three
bodies regulate the communication allocations: the Consultative Committee on International Telephony, the Consultative Committee on International Radiocommunications, and the International Frequency Registration Board (lFRB). The first two
organizations formulate policy and set standards. The IFRB coordinates and approves
frequency and orbit requests. Because these agencies are international and the number
of requests is large and growing, we must plan years in advance to get approval for our
communications request.
Various other bodies exist to assist organizations in coordinating and rationalizing
commercial use of the radio frequency spectrum. Three of these are the International
Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (lNTELSAT), the European Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (EUfELSAT), and the International Maritime Satellite
Organization (lNMARSAT), which assist their member nations with telecommunications planning.
11.2.1 RequirementS
The IT&C subsystem derives its requirements from many sources, such as (1) the
mission or science objective (top-level requirements such as architecture orbit lifetime and environment); (2) the satellite (system-level); (3) the IT&C 'subsystem
(internal requirements); (4) other satellite subsystems; (5) the ground station and any
relay satellite (compatibility); and (6) mission operations (the satellite operational
modes as a function of time). From these sources come the requirements that drive the
subsystem design: (1) data rates (commands and telemetry for health and status or for
missio~ and scien~ needs); (2) ~ta volume; ~3) data storage type; (4) uplink and
downlink frequenCies; (5) bandWidths; (6) receive and transmit power; (7) hardware
~; (8) beam~dth; (9) Effective Isotropic Radiated Power (EIRP); and (10) antenna
gain/system noISe temperature. Table 11-19 shows the effects of these requirements
on the IT&C-subsystem design.

Comments

4,000 bps typical, 8-64 bps deep spe Range 2,000-8,000 bps
8,000 bps Is common

40-10,000 bps

Low < 32 bps
Medium = 32 bps-1 Mbps
High > 1Mbps-1 Gbps

MIssion dependent

Data Volume

Record data, compress data, and
transmit during longer windows

Data rate x transmission duration
• Shorter duration Increases data rate
• May require data compression

Data Storage

Solid-state recorders 128 x 106 bits

PoDcy may dictate all data be stored
that Is not Immediately transmitted
MIssion may require that data be
stored then played back later

Frequency

Use existing assigned frequencies
and channels
Use systems that are compatible to
the existing system
Use C.E. Shannon's theorem to
caJculate channel ~~
See Chap. 13, Eq. ( 3-26 •

Policy set by FCC, ITU, National
Telecommunications & Info. Admin.
Refer to the atmospheriC frequency
absorption charts
Primary driver Is data rate
Secondary driver Is modulation
scheme
SIC power may limit size of TT&C
system transmitter

Mission! science

• Orbital assignment (further than 2 deg from a satellite with the same frequency, if geosynchronous)
• Desired power flux density on surface (depending on our receiver antennas)

38S

Bandwidths

Power

Use larger antennas,
higher efficiency amplifiers
Reconsider data requirements

Mass

Use lWTAs for higher RF power
output to reduce antenna size,
reconsider data requirements

BeamwIdth

See Tables 13-14, 13-15, and 13-16 Ground coverage area requirements
or the radiation footprint on the ground
for various antenna types, beam
shapes, and beamwldths
Antenna gain null requirements
Antenna pointing error

BRP
(Effective Isotropic
Radiated Power)
(Transmitter Req't)

For a constant EIRP:
As anteMa size (gain) Increases,
the transmitter power requirement
decreases

SlCTT&C system mass aDocation may
limit size of antennas

EIRP (dB) - transmltterJfcwer +
antenna gain - front en losses
MIn ElRP required = space loss + atmo
loss + antenna pointing loss - receiver
antenna gain - receiver senaIIIvIty

G/T Is the sensitivity of the receiving
Gff
See Table 13-10 for various
(Receiver antenna communication system temperatures station and a common ~re of Merit;
for
an existing satelDte Dn a ground
galnlrecelver sys
andG/Ts
station can onl~VIII)' Its antenna gain
nolsetem~
and system no temp to Improve the
(Receiver eq't)
system signal-to-nolse ratio

Classic trade studies include size of the antenna aperture vs. transmitter power,
solid-state amplifiers vs. traileling-wave tube amplifiers (1WTAs), and spacecraft
complexity vs. ground complexity. IT we increase an antenna's aperture size. its gain
increases; therefore, we may decrease the transmitter's RF output power and sti1I
maintain.the received signal strength. Unfortunately, large antenna apertures are very
heavy and have narrow beamwidths (producing more stringent pointing requirements). As Chap. 13 (Eq. 13-17) shows, the beamwidth decreases with an increase in

386

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.2

the antenna's aperture size. Depending on the frequency and gain needed, we commonly decide between solid-state and TWT amplifiers-a system-level trade. To do
so, we must assess the effects' of the sPacecraft's total mass, solar-array size, system
reliability, and antenna aperture size. Solid-state amplifiers tend to be more reliable,
lighter, and smaller. TWT amplifiers have a lower technology risk (at higher gains)
and a higher efficiency. We must use TWTAs when the RF output power requirement
is too high at a given frequency for solid-state amplifiers, or when the solid-state
amplifier efficiency is too low for our application. At today's technology level, we can
design solid-state amplifiers with power levels of 65 W at UHF frequencies, 40 W at
S-band, and about 20 W at EHF frequencies.
The old rule-of-thumb was to keep the satellite as simple as possible by moving all
the complexity and processing to the ground. With modem processors, however, we
can now do a tremendous amount of processing on a satellite. Thus, we can design for
lower downlink data rates and simpler ground stations or we can collect more data
while not overburdening the IT&C subsystem. The new trend is to process as much
information as possible on the satellite whenever the mission or science community do
not need the raw data.
At the system level, the IT&C subsystem can interface with a fixed or a mobile
ground station, as well as a relay satellite. Table 11-20 lists examples of these systems.
We usually select the system-level interfaces when establishing mission, satellite, and
operational requirements.
TABLE 11-20. Options for System-Level Interfaces to the TT&C Subsystem. Shown below
are several interface possibDities for a TT&C subsystem. If the interface is an
existing system, we also provide the system's document number. (Courtesy of
TRW)

Interface

FIxed Ground
Station

Example of
Systems
SGLS-S-bend system
SDL8-Secure 44120 GHz
GSTDN-S-bend 9 and 26 m
NASA DSN 8-, X-bend 26, 34, 70 m
Misslon-dedicated or unique

Whereto FInd
Subsystem Parameters
TOR-Q059 (6110-01)-3, Reissue H
MIL-STD-1582
}JPL-DSN-81D-S, rev D

Mobile Ground GP8--Ground antenna, 8-bend, SGLS
Aerospace Report
Station
DMSP MK IV van, 8-bend
TOR-G059 (6110-01 )-3
AFSCN
TMG8--7-m diameter, SGL8-compatible
Mission-dedlcated or unique
• DedIcated comm traDer
• Transportable tent
Relay
TDRS$-S-band and KU-bend
NASA Goddard STDN 1012
Satellite
DSCS m-UHF, 8-bend, SHF
DSCS III Interface Guide, DCA
Future Relay MILSTAR
Sat; Sister Sat Mission-dedlcated or unique
wlln Mission
Constellation

At the subsystem level, the IT&C subsystem interfaces directly with every subsystem except for propulsion. The interface with guidance, navigation, and control

Telemetry, Tracking, and Command

11.2

387

deals primarily with antenna pointing. ~t uses gimbals, or motorized rotary JOints, that
move in 1 or 2 axes to steer the spacecraft's narrow-beam antennas. Nongunbaled or
fixed directional'antennas rely on feed arrays for small movements of the antc:~a
beaJD or on spacecraft attitude maneuvers for large movements. The World Administrative Radio Conference established antenna-pointing requirements for geostationary
satellites. The pointing error must be the smaller value of 10% of the half-power
(-3 dB) beamwidth or 0.3 deg. Table 11-21 summarizes the IT&C subsystem's
constraints and requirements on other subsystems.
TABLE 11-21. TT&C Subsystem Constraints and RequIrements on Other Subsystems.
The TT&C subsystem interfaces with all these subsystems and must reDabIy
pass data back and forth or receive support.
Requirement

Subsystem
Atl/tude
Determination
and Control

Constrafnt

• Antenna pointing requirements for
• Spacecraft pointing and
gimbaled anteMas (gimbal degrees of
attitude knowiedge for fixed
freedom, amount of rotation)
antennas may impact antenna
beamwidth requirements
• Pointing requirements of the lesser of 1/10
of antenna beamwidth or 0.3 deg
• Uncertainty in attitude and
pointing estimates for the
• Ciosed-ioop pointing requirements
pointing loss in the Onk budget
(i.e., cross-links requiring autotrecldng)

Commandand • cOmmand and telemetry data rates
• Onboard storage and
processing
Date HandDng • Clock, bit sync, and timing requirements
• 2-way comm requirements
• Autonomous fault detection and recovery
requirements (ROM stored command
sequence that automatically selects the
backup receiver and omnl-antenna)
• Command & telemetry electrical interface
Electrical
Power
Subsystem

• Distribution requirements

Structure!
Thermal

• Heat sinks for trevellng wave tube
• Temperature uncertainty on
non-oven-controlledfrequency
ampDfiers
sources resulting in frequency
• Heat dissipation of all active boxes
uncertainty
• Location of n&C subsystem electronics
and antennas (locate comm electronics as
close to the antennas as possible to
minimize RF cable loss)
• A clear field of view and movement for ali
gimbaled anteMas

Payload

• Requirements for storing mission deta
• Maximum data rates for
mission or science telemetry
• RF and EMC interface requirements
(conducted emissions, conducted
• Maximum data volume for
susceptibDity, radiated emissions, radiated
mission or science telemetry
susceptibDity)
• Special requirements tor modulation,
coding, and decoding

Propulsion

• None

• Amount and quality of power,
including requirements for
duty cycle, average, and peak
power

• Nona

388

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.2

The interface with the subsystem for command and data handling passes spacecraft
commands and telemetry, as well as the 1T&C subsystem's control and reporting of
health and status. The interface must allow the system to receive spacecraft commands
while transmitting real-time telemetry. It also must permit safing of the subsystem and
autonomous fault detection and correction.
The interface with the electrical-power subsystem controls the amount and quality
of spacecraft power to the 1T&C subsystem. One common design has the electricalpower subsystem deliver +28 Vdc unregulated to the transponders and other active
boxes in the 1T&C subsystem and +28 Vdc regulated to the TWTAs. This design
requires dc-to-dc converters at each piece of equipment to provide the correct voltage
changes. Another interface design centralizes the power conversion and conditiOning,
f?r the 1T&C subsystem's active elements. However, because TWTAs require specific voltage levels (-1,000 Vdc, +1,000 Vdc, and +4,000 Vdc,), centralized power
conversion and conditioning is not very common with those types of amplifiers.
The payload interface mainly transfers mission or science telemetry data to either
the ground station or a relay satellite. To characterize this interface we must know the
data rate, data volume, and any data storage requirements. This interface may have to
couple signals between the payload and the 1T&C subsystem and to modulate the
payload telemetry.
Table 11-22 gives a design process for the 1T&C subsystem. Once we state the
perfonnance parameters for 1T&C and identify the ground and spacebome equipment, we use the methods in Chap. 13 to determine overall performance of the
communication links. We must iterate this process many times within the design team
to attain an acceptable spacecraft weight, configuration, and perfonnance level.
TABLE 11-22. Preliminary Design Process for the TT&C Subsystem.
Step
1. Determine requirements

Comments

Where
Discussed

Range, orbit and spacecraft geometry Table 11-19
Data rate and volume
Minimum elevation angle
Worst case rain conditions
Bit error rate

2. Select frequency

Typically an existing, assigned
frequency

Sec. 1122,
Table 13-12

3. Determine required bandwidth

Use Shannon's theorem; primary
driver Is data rate

Eq.13-24
(Chap. 13)

4. Do major subsystem trades between: Use Onk budget to trade between
components
- Receiver noise temperature
- Receiver gain (antenna aperture)
- Transmitter gain (antenna aperture)
- Transmitter power

Table 13-13

5. Do major subsystem trades between
the TT&C subsystem and other
subsystems

Understand the satellite's sensitivity
to each TT&C subsystem design
feature

Table 11-21

6. Calculate parformance parameters

EIRP, GfT, and margin

Tables
11-19,13-12

7. EstImate subsystem weight and power Use analogy with existing systems
8. Document I'flBSOns for selection

Important to document assumptions

Table 11-26

NlA

11.2

Telemetry, Tracking, and Command

389

11.2.2 Designing the TI&C Subsystem
Tabl~ 11-23 lists parameters for the 1T&C subsystem we should specify and monitor in addition to the system-level requirements in Table 11-19.
LE 1123. Design Panuneters for the TT&C Subsystem. Below are design parameters
TAB
for the TT&C subsystem that are not typically specified at the system level. (See
Table 11-19 for system-level parameters.)
rparameter

Comment

Antenna
Sidelobe
Levels

Design to minimize. Sidelobes degrade the antenna's directionality. Very high
sidelobes may Interfere with other antennes and receivers on the satellite. High
sidelobe levels also affect security by making detection of signals more likely.

polarization

Polarizations can be circular (right or left), or linear (horizontal or vertical). To
decrease signa/loss In the link, the polarizations need to be compatible. For
example, the sateUite antenna and ground station must both have rlght-circular
polarization.

Frequency

When we need to acquire the signal quickly, the receiver frequency must be
known and stable. Thus, we specify the original receiver frequency's set point,
short-term stability, temperature stability, and aging stability so we can acquire
the uplink signal with little uncertainty.

Stabl11/y

Capture and
Tracking
Range

The capture range is the bend of frequencies over which the upllnk-carrler signal
can drift from the receiver's best-lock frequency, so the receiver will stlJllock to
the uplink signal. The tracking range is the band of frequencies the receiver will
follow while locked to a sweeping, upllnk-carrler signal without losing lock.
Typically the capture range is 1% of the tracking range.

Dip/axer
Isolation

The diplexer allows us to use the same antenna for transmitting and receMng.
The diplexer Isolates the transmitter from the receiver. A dlplexer with low
Isolation may require a band-reject fiiter between the transmitter and the dlplexer.

CoupUng

Signal and noise coupling between a transmitting antenna and a receMng
antenna may cause the receMng antenna to lock onto a frequency coming from
the transmitting antenna's transmitter. More commonly, broadband noise from
the transmitting antenna may couple over to the receMng antenna and raise the
noise fioor of the receMng antenna's receiver, reducing the slgnal-ta-noIse ratio.

Between

Antennas

As Table 11-24 shows, selection criteria for 1T&C subsy~tems fall ~to three
categories: performance, compatibility, and other. Performance: IS th~ most ~p?rtant
selection criterion. This subsystem's hardware must meet specifications of~~
performance to close the communication link with an ?'7eptable signal-t~n~ ra~o.
The Bit Error Rate (HER) is a Figure of Merit for the digI~ p~ o~the C?mmum~tion
link. It is the probability that a bit sent over the commumcation link will be ~lVed
incorrectly. We typically specify this rate to be 1 x IQ-6 for the command uplink .and
1 x 10-5 for the telemetry downlink, depending on the nature of the data. To achieve
this rate, the system must meet certain techni~ specifications: RF power output for
the transmitter, receiver-noise figure, stable oscillator frequency, and the TT&C subsystem's front-end losses and antenna gains.
Compatibility is an important selection criterion when the 1T&C subsystem must
communicate with existing systems. If the 1T&C subsystem must talk to the ground
stations in the Space Oround Link System (SOLS), then the tranSponder must be compatible with SOLS. Likewise, if it must talk to the Tracking ~d D~ Relay Satellite
System (TDRSS), the cross-link transponder must be compatible With TDRSS.

390

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.2

TABLE 11-24. SelecUon Criteria for the Trac Subsystem. Selection criteria at the subsystem level faD Into three broad categories: performance, compatibility, and
other. Chapter 13, Table 13-1, shows the selection process for communications
architectures. (Courtesy of TRW)
Category
Performance

Crlt8r1a
• Mass
• Volume

Comme~

3~1

Power
Data
Storage

TIm

C&DH

TIm

~

C&DHCmds

} See Table 11-26

• Power (RF and dc)
• Bit error rate-Figure of Merit

Telemetry, Tracking, and Command

11.2

UpOnk = 10-6, downlink = Hr5 are
typical values (Sec. 13.3)

• Noise f1gure-Figure of Merit

4 dB typical for SGLS

• Frequency stability

Typically In parts per mllnon

Data
Storage

TIm

C&DH

TIm

C&DHCmds

• Insertion loss
• RellabDIty

Measured In terms of mean time
between faDures (Sec. 19.2)

• Efficiency

Percent transponder-radiated
powerJlnput power

Compatlbflity

• Compatibility with existing systems
• SGLS compatiblDty
• TDRSS compatibDIty

Other

• Technology risk
• Heritage

Subjective (Sec. 20.4)
Measured In terms of previous
spaceflight experience

In the ''Other'' category, heritage is important when the schedule and budget are
tight and technology risk must be low. Typically, we measure heritage in terms of
previous spaceflight experience. A lot of communication hardware meets all three
selection criteria. A typical SOLS transponder (1) can close the links to the ground
stations With an acceptable bit error rate, (2) is compatible with the ground stations in
the SOLS, and (3) has flown before.
Figure 11-4 diagrams a generic TT&C subsystem. A typical subsystem contains
two transponders (for redundancy). The transmitter (downlink) path is as follows.
From the left side of Fig. 11-4, two digital bit streams enter the transponder. One enters
either from data storage or real-time from the payload. The other stream comes from
command and data handling with telemetry data on health and status. These two data
streams are modulated onto subcarriers, which are then modulated onto the carrier
output. The composite signal is then amplified and routed out of the transponder and
through a low-pass filter. The filter reduces second and higher-order harmonics to
decrease frequency spurs and intermodulation products from the spacecraft's receiver.
From the filter, the composite signal travels through a band-reject filter; a double-pole,
double-throw (transfer or 2P2T) RF switch; a dip1exer; and finally to the antenna
where it radiates to the ground station. The band-reject filter is a notch filter that
attenuates frequencies coming from the transmitter and falling within the receiver's
pass band. This filtering action further isolates the transmitter and receiver signals.
The RF switch selects transmitter A or B and antenna A or B. The diplexer allows a
transmitter and receiver to share the same antenna. It also isolates the transmitter from
the receiver port at the receiver's center frequency, so the transmitter doesn't lock,
jam, or damage the receiver.

TIm
C&DH

Cmd

FIg. 11-4. Block Diagram of a Generic Tr&C Subsystem. This subsystem has fuD redundancy: two transponders with paraDel transmit and receive signal paths. The d1plexer
allows the same antenna to be used for transmitting and receMng. The band-reJect

filter attenuates spurious signals originating from the transmitter at the receiver's
center frequency to help the d1plexer Isolate the receiver from the transmitter.

The receiver's uplink path is as follows. First, we assume the equipment modulates
the digital command data onto a subcarrier and further modulates the subcarrier onto
the uplink-carrier frequency to form a composite uplink signal. Then, from the ~ght of
Fig. 11-4, the composite signal enters the subsystem through the antenna. The diplexer
routes the composite signal to the receiver RF switch, which then selects antenna A or
B and receiver A or B. The composite signal travels through the receiver's low-pass
filter, which rejects unwanted transmitter harmonics and freq~ency spurs that ~y
exist above the diplexer's stop band. The signal then moves mto the transponder s
receiver, which demodulates it and routes the digital-command bit stream to the
command and data handling subsystem.
Figure 11-5 diagrams a typical transponder. The composite uplink signal enters the
receiver where the command data stream is demodulated from the carrier and subcarrier. Th~ data stream enters the command detector, which validates the stream and
forwards the data and receiver-in-lock indicator to the command and data handling
sUbsystem.
The telemetry on the spacecraft's health and status, as w:e~ as ~e telemetry fro~
the mission or science payload, enters the module that conditions It The telemetry 18
modulated onto subcarriers (if applicable) and sent to the exciterltransmitter to be
modulated onto the carrier. If the transponder is in the two-way-coherent mode, the
transmitter generates the downlink carrier with the reference frequency (coherent
drive) from the receiver's voltage-controlled oscillator. The composite down1ink
signal then goes to the ground station for processing.
For the ranging signals, the receiver demodulates the ranging tones or coding from
the composite signal. The tones or pseudorandom noise code then moves to the trans-

392

Spacecraft Subsystems

UpDnk Composlta
Signal RF CarrIer &
Subcarrlers
(From Antenna)

~
0

I

'I:
l!!
/II
z=

I

8
DownUnk
CompOsite Signal
RF CarrIer &
Subcarriers
(To Antenna)

Receiver

cl t

Commands
DIgIIaI Bits
Modulated
onto
Subcerrier

11.2

DIgIIaI Command
Command
1 - - - - -.. Data to C&DH
Detector
Subsystem

cJi

Frequency

.!!l
CI)

C>

~
a
a:

- Jl

TransmlIter

Downlink
Telemetry
DlgI1aI Bits
Modulated
onto
Subcerrier

CondItIon
Control for

-

DIgIIaI Telemetry on
Spacecraft's Health
,---and Status from
C&DH Subsystem

Telemetry ~
Signals

cl t

393

TABLE 11-25. Attributes of Common Telemetry, Tracking, and Subsystems. ThIs table
presents the principal characteristics of two upllnkldownftnk systems and three
cross-link systems. Each system can support various modulation schemes. The
antenna charecterlstlcs for the uplinkldownUnk systems contain an Earthcoverage antenna for nominal operations and a hemispherlcal-coverage anteMa for emergency operations. See Sec. 13.3 for modulation descriptions.
(Courtesy of TRW)

,-

~

Exclterl

Telemetry, Tracking, and Command

11.2

ApplIcation

Modulation

Antenna
Charac-

UIL

DIL

UIL

DIL

teristics

8-band
1.75 to
1.85
GHz

8-band
220 to
2.30
GHz

FSK
AM

PCM
PM

PM

FM

Earth
coverage;
l'Iemlspherical
coverage

SGLS Standard,
refer to TOR-0059
RelssueH

Ground
Space
Tracking
and Data
Network

S-band
2.02 to
2.12
GHz

S-band
2.20 to
2.30
GHz

PCM
PSK
FSK

PCM
PSK
PM

Earth
coverage;
Hemispherical
coverage

GSTDN Is slowly
phasing out.
JPL-DSNIs
absorbing some
of Its assets. (See
JPL-DSN-81O-S
rev D)

Cross-link
Within

W-band
60GHz

W-band
60GHz

Any

Any

Space
Ground
UnkSub-

system

Remarks

D1g11a1 MIssion or
Science Telemetry
from Payload or
Data Storage

Fig. 11-5. Block Diagram Showing How a Typical Transponder Works. The receiver Is
Isolated from the transmitter except for the ranging signal path and the coherent drive
path. The coherent drive comes from the receiver's voltage-controlled oscillator when
we want the downlink carrier to be a ratio of the uplink carrier.

Constel-

mitter, where it is conditioned and modulated onto the composite downlink carrier.
amplified, and transmitted out of the transponder.
In a typical 3-axis-stabilized satellite, we mount omni-antennas to the top and
bottom of the satellite. We mount all ground-link antennas to provide an unobstructed
view of Earth and place cross-link antennas to provide an unobstructed view of the
relay satellite. Historically, the TT&C subsystem's electronics are as close to the
antennas as possible. If we gimbal the antennas, we must make sure the satellite's
body or other appendages such as the solar arrays do not obscure the antenna's field
of view.
Spin-stabilized satellites are usually cylindrical, and commonly contain a despun
section. Except for omnidirectional varieties, we must mount antennas on the despun
section. Frequently. we put the RF components and associated electronics on the
despun section to avoid passing RF signals through rotary joints.
From a TT&C point of view, satellites in LEO or in geosynchronous orbit are
similar. The primary differences are the path losses. We compensate for these losses
with either antenna gain or transmitter power. An interesting case involves an antenna
beam providing spot communication from a LEO spacecraft for an area of the Earth.
As the satellite ranges away from the coverage area, the antenna beamwidth to cover
the area decreases. The increased antenna gain resulting from the narrow beamwidth
compensates for the path loss based on the inverse square law. The longer distance
demands no added transmitter power.
Table 11-25 summarizes five ways we can apply a TT&C subsystem. For each
application, the table specifies frequency. modulation. and common antenna
characteristics.

Narrow beam Modulation, coding,
0.1 deg typical and encryption can
be customized

lation
Cross-link

to
TDRSS

Optical

QPSK
QPSK Narrow beam
S-band S-band
K-band K-band Spread Spread
Ku-band Ku-band spectrum spectrum

IRto
UV

IRto
UV

PPM!
PCM

Legend:
FSK Frequency Shift Keying
AM = Amplitude Modulation
FM
Frequency Modulation
QPSK = Quadrature Phase Shift Keying

=

=

PPM!
PCM

Telescope
pencil beam

TDRSSUser
Standard (See NASA
Goddard STDN
101.2TDRSS
Users' Guide)
Frequency depends
on device

PSK = Phase Shift Keying
PCM = Pu/sed-Code Modulation
PM = Phase Modulation
POM = Phase Quadrature
Modulation
PPM = Pulse Position Modulation

Table 11-26 contains detailed mass, power, and volume characteristics of three
common TT&C subsystems: TDRSS-compatible in the S-band, generic X-band, and
typical Ku-band. The information in these two tables comes from specification sheets
issued by manufacturers of communication hardware, and summarizes today's
technology for TT&C subsystems.

Spacecraft Subsystems

394

11.2

TABLE 11-26. Typical Parameters for TT&C Subsystems. Two transponders provide redundancy and two hemlspherlcal-coverage antennas offer full coverage. The
Ku-band system assumes another (8-band) system applies when the spacecraft
deviates from its proper attitude. (Courtesy of TRW and L3 Communications)
Mass (kg)
Component

Qty

Each

Total

Power Dimensions
(cm)
(W)

Remarks

Typical X-Band CommunlcaUon Subsystem
• Transponder
-Receiver
- Transmitter

2

• FIlters/switch
diplexers.

1

1.5

1.5

0.0

2
1
1

025
92
1.4

0.5
92
1.4

0.0
0.0
0.0

202

45.4

• Antennas
-Hemls
-Parabola
-Waveguide

3.8

7.6
10.4
35.0

TOTAL

20X22X7 Generic X-band transponder
- 3-W RF output
- Solid-state power amp
10X22X4

1 set

8.0dlaX4 Circular Wave Guide
150diaX70 4-dBigain
200 em long WR112

Typical 8-Band TDRSS User Communication Subsystem
• Transponder
-Receiver
- Transmitter

2

• Filters/switch
diplexers

1

2.0

2
1
1
1

0.4
92
2.3
0.5

• Antennas
-Hemls
-Parabola
-Turnstile
- Coax cables

6.87

TOTAL

17.5
40.0

14X33x7 2nd generation TDRSS user
- 12-W RF output
- Solid-state power amp

2.0

0.0

15x30x6 1 set

0.8
92
2.3
0.5

0.0
0.0
0.0

28.54

57.5

13.74

9.5 dia X 13
150dlaX70
10dlaX 15
12d1aX 150

Circular Wave Guide
4-dBi gain
Cavity type
1 set

Typical Ku-Band Communication Subsystem
• Transponder
- Receiver
- Transmitter

2

• Filters/switch
d1plexers

1

12

1
1
1

0.5
2.0
0.7

• Antennas
- Earth cover
-Parabola
-Waveguide
TOTAL

4.45

4.3
20.0

17X34X9 Generic Ku-band transponder
- 4-W RF output
- Solid-state power amp

1.2

0.0

8X19X4

0.5
2.0
0.7

0.0
0.0
0.0

4.0dlaX2 Earth coverage hom
6OdlaX22 Cross-link antenna
125 em long

13.3

24.3

8.90

1 set

"dBlis the antenna gain reIativB to an isotropic radiator expressed In decfbels (dB). See Sec. 13.3.5

11.3

Command and Data Handling

395

11.3 Command and Data Handling
Richard T. Berget, BF Goodrich Aerospace
Data Systems Division
The command and data handling system, C&DH, performs two major functions. It
receiVes, validates, decodes, and distributes commands to other spacecraft systems
and gathers, processes, and fonnats spacecraft housekeeping and niission data for
downlink or use by an onboard computer. This equipment often includes additional
functions, such as spacecraft timekeeping, computer health monitoring (watchdog),
and security interfaces.
While they normally provide independent functions, the combination of command
and data handling into a single subsystem provides an efficient means for autonomous
control of spacecraft functions. An onboard computer or microprocessor can send
commands and monitor telemetry over a single interface with the C&DH system,
allowing the control of multiple subsystems.
The C&DH system's size is directly proportional to spacecraft complexity. The
more systems a spacecraft has, the more monitoring and configuration capability
required. Reliability concerns alone may double the hardware's size if we require
redundant C&DH subsystems.
The ideal C&DH systeln is one which has been proven on another spacecraft and
which requires no modification for the mission under development. However, new
missions are usually supported by systems which evolve from older designs. We make
small improvements in the perfonnance of the systems from the viewpoint of speed.
power, weight, volume, or other operating parameter. In the case of a new or custom
design, extensive testing must simulate the strenuous environments involved in a
space launch and flight.
11.3.1 Introduction to C&DH
Figure 11-6 shows a typical command decoder. Command messages can originate
from an onboard computer, uplink transponders, or a hardline test interface. An
arbitration scheme is necessary for source selection which gives uplink commands
priority. Commands from the computer are delayed until a time slot is available. The
hardline test interface is not active during flight and when in use overrldesthe other
command sources.
Several standards exist for command message formats. (See CCSDS 201.0-B-l,
1987.) Typically, a command consists of a synchronization code, spacecraft address
bits, command message bits, and error check bits. Received commands are validated
prior to execution. Validation consists of receiving synchronization code, checking
command message length (correct number of bits), exactly matching the spacecraft
address and any fixed-bit patterns (unused message bits), and detecting no errors in an
error check polynomial code. Once the decoder validates a command, it increments a
counter to record the number of executed commands. Then the message bits pass to a
decoder for execution. The command decoder rejects commands that do not pass the
validation criteria and it increments the command reject counter. The data handling
system reads the accept and the reject counters and includes them in the downlink data
to provide operational feedback.

396

Spacecraft Subsystems

COmmand
Sources

11.3

Command

r-----------------------I
1
1
1

Outputs

1

~ Pulse

Command
Source
Arbitration

1'---_ _---'
1
1

,

Formatter

and
Control
Logic

1 Pulse
r--=-'7-:-~ Data

1
1 Command

Multiplexed
Signal ,- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ~
Inputs
,,
Data

'I

Command
Message
Validation

397

Command and Data Handling

11.3

'--7--~

VoHage
Detect

Clock
Enable

1

1

1-~~ ___________ .. ________ I
Prime
Power

;:

J

~

BI-Ievel

I

1-"'-----1

Ag.11-6. Command Decoder Block Diagram.

,,

,

L ________________________________________ _

The command decoder determines command output type and the specific interface
channel. A typical system provides two types of output: discrete and serial. Discrete
commands are a fixed amplitude and a fixed pulse duration and consist of two basic
types:

• High-Level Discrete Command: A +28 V, 10 to 100 ms pulse used to drive a
latching relay coil or fire an ordnance device.
• Low-Level Discrete Command: An open collector or 5 V pulse typically interfacing with digital logic.
A serial command is a 3-signal interface consisting of a shift clock, serial command
data. and a data enable used to indicate the interface is active. A portion of the received
command message bits (typically 8 or 16) is sent in serial form to a user subsystem.
The terms data handling and telemetry are often used interchangeably. However,
data handling is more than just telemetry. IEEE Standard 100 offers this definition of
telemetry:

Telemetering (remOte metering). Measurement with the aid of intermediate
means that permit the measurement to be interpreted at a distance from the
primary detector. The distinctive feature oftelemetering is the nature ofthe
translating means, which includes provision for converting the measurand
into a representative quantity ofanother kind that can be transmitted conveniently for measurement at a distance. ,The actual distance is irrelevant.
Data handling combines telemetry from multiple sources and provides it for
downlink or internal spacecraft use. Figure 11-7 illustrates a typical spacecraft datahandling unit
Most data handling systems are of the time-division multiplexed type. These
systems sequence through their inputs in a predetermined order, then organize them in
a fixed output format Other systems process inputs as lists of data samples and/or
allow random access by an onboard computer. Input signal sampling rate is
detennined by signal bandwidth. Sample rate must be a minimum of two times the

Fig. 11-7. Data Handling Unn Block Diagram.

greatest frequency component contained in th~ sign~. (See Sec. 13.2.f'?1' a more indepth discussion on data rates.) Da~ from all mputs IS c~nverted to digItal.form and
formatted into a serial stream of continuous data for downlink. The data rate IS the sum
of all input sample rates plus some bandwidth for insertion of synchro~on ~es
and a frame identification counter. IRIG Standard 106, Chap. 4, proVIdes a detajled
discussion of downlink telemetry formats and associated format terms.
The data handling system may also supply telemetry to an onboard computer. The
computer sends its request to the data handling system which processes the input and
returns telemetry data. This operation is interleaved with downlink telemetry gathering which is usually continuous.
Analog telemetry data comes to the data handling equipment in many forms. Often,
direct transducer outputs require signal conditioning prior to conversion from analog
to digital form. Data handling hardware is simplified, however, when input signals are
preconditioned or fall in the general categories described below.

• High-Level Analog: A telemetry channel with information encoded as an
analog voltage, typically in the range of 0 to 5.2 V. These are active analog
inputs in that the command and data handling system does not provide
measurement excitation. Data handling equipment converts this information to
digital form.
• Low-Level Analqg: A telemetry channel with information encoded as an
analog voltage. The signal range is low enough to require amplification before
the information is encoded into digital form. Typical gain values fall between
100 to 300. Because of the signal's low voltage range, it is subject to noise
contamination and thus uses an interface in which the telemetry information is
the difference between signal and reference inputs to the command and data
handling system. This is differential or double-ended interface.

398

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.3

Command and Data Handling

11.3

• Passive Analog: A telemetry channel with information encoded as a resistance. The command and data handling system supplies a constant current to
the resistive sensor and encodes the resulting IR voltage drop into a digital
word.
All analog telemetry is converted to digital form within the command and data
handling system. The system determines data resolution by the number of quantization
levels. More information on this topic may be found in Chap. 13.
The two most common forms of digital telemetry data are described below:
• Bi-Level (Discrete) Input: A telemetry channel conveying two state information (such as on/off or enable/disable). Information is encoded as voltages,
but may be encoded as a resistance or the presence or absence of a signal.
Typically a logic 0 0 to 1 V, and a logic 1 3 V to 5 V (or 3 V to 28 V).

=

=

• Serial Telemetry (Digital) Interface: A 3-signal interface used to transfer
digital data from an external source to the data handling equipment. The
command and data' handling system provides a shift clock and an interface
enable signal to control data transfer. Interface circuits may be differential line
drivers or single ended. Serial rather than parallel interfaces are preferred on
spacecraft, because they simplify cable design and require fewer interface
circuits.

11.3.2 C&DH System Sizing Process
Table 11-27 summarizes the command and data handling subsystem estimating
process. The desired output of this process is a reasonable estimate of the hardware
necessary to support the mission including estimate of its size, weight, and power. Use
this table in conjunction with Tables 11-28 and 11-29 to assist in estimating the system
parameters in the case of unknowns. The results may then be fed back into the mission
design process and adjusted as necessary. FrreSat has been used as an example to
illustrate the process and highlight the main points of estimating when the majority of
needed inputs are unknown or flexible.
Step I-Identify Fnnctions to be Performed by the C&DH System. The first
step in baseJining the command and data handling system is to define the primary
functional requirements needed to monitor and control the spacecraft. At a minimum,
most missions require command processing and housekeeping data acquisition. The
size and complexity of these two systems is determined by the spacecraft design, the
technical requirements, and additional functions and subsystems supported.

Command Processing
There are three primary considerations for baselining a command decoder:
• The number of command output channels
• Any requirement for stored commands
• Any requirement for computer commands or ACS functions
Table 11-28, gives guidelines for channel counts and sizing. As the spacecraft
design evolves, we refine the needed quantities and types of channels. Whenever
possible, interfaces to the C&DH system should be standardized as a means of saving
cost, but this is not mandatory. The C&DH system is an excellent place to put spacecraft functions that do not seem to fit anywhere else.

J!

J

JI!!

Ii:

400

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.3

w~ must ~l~de the. capability to ~tore commands if we require spacecraft control
wh~ I~ n~t m VIew of Its ground stations. or as a means of recovery if the communi~tion link IS lost These commands may be controlled by matching a time-tag or b

sImple delay counter from a controlled timing event Stored commands of this ~
may be easily implemented without a general-purpose processor.
.
We must add an onboard computer if we require a decision-making element on th
spacecraft. ~~ we es!Bblish the need for a computer, we can plan to use it to perfon:
many functions ~cluding the stored command capability, attitude control algorithms
~d da~ processmg and sto~ge .. lntegrating at.titude control with the command syste~
will typica1ly add some spectal mterface reqwrements for driving control elements.

Telemetry Processing
The data handling system provides the ability to acquire data for:
• Spacecraft housekeeping data (health and status)
• Feedback for onboard control of spacecraft functions
• Routing of payload or subsystem data to and from receivers and transmitters
storage or affected system controllers
'
· Th.e quan~ty of telemeay input chan~els required for monitoring spacecraft health
IS typIcally ~uectly p~porti~nal to the Size, complexity, and quantity of payloads and
subsystems mvolved m meeting the primary and secondary missions. The majority of
these channels are standard interfaces to temperature, pressure, and voltage transdu~rs. Som~ su.bsystems provide the ability to monitor their own health and integrate
the ~ormation mto a data stream. For new subsystems, the awareness of what the data
handling system ~an ~o for them may prevent an unusual de$ign or duplication of a
large amount of CIrCWtry.
· The data handling system may acquire payload or subsystem data also. Of critical
Importan~e to the system design is the quantity of data and its transfer rate. The telemetry acqwred for spacecraft health is limited in speed due to the time necessary to
accurately convert analog signals to digital information. If a subsystem or payload data
stream exceeds 2~ kbps or is greater than a few thousand bits in size, it is usually
n~ to proVIde data b~ers or to process the data in a separate section of the data
handlIng system. Often, an mterleaver may be provided to integrate and synchronize
the health and payload data into a single stream.
If an onboa:d computer is available, it may require additional signa1s to perform its
!BS~. These SIgnalS may not be needed in the downlink telemetry format Therefore,
~t IS usually preferable for the computer to have the capability to request data
mdependently of the preprogrammed downlink format The computer may also be
used. to preprocess subsystem and health data to reduce the downlink bandwidth
reqwrement. (See Chap. 16 for a discussion of onboard processing.)

Other Functions
· Tim~. ~ost space~ designs require the availability of a time word (universal

~e, mISSIOn ~lapsed ~me, or delay) for support of attitude control, stored commandmg, .or data time-ta~g. ~everal systems can provide this time, including GPS

receIVers, computer-mamtained counters, and hardware timers. The most critical
parameters for the definition of this function are:
• Time word granularity

11.3

Command and Data HaodHng

401

• Stability requirement
• Acceptable uncertainty

Granularity defines the smallest increments of time maintained for use on the
spacecraft or of interest on the ground. This value is usually driven by the accuracy of
time needed for data time-tagging or the attitude control system. Typically this is one
millisecond or one microsecond. Over specifying this value will increase the hardware
required. increase the cost, and decrease the available bandwidth for data. IRIG-B time
code generators transmit a I-sec resolution time word and a I-MHz oscillator to allow
the user to create their own smaller granularity time.
The aging characteristics of the primary oscillator, which drives the timing system,
determines the drift characteristics of the time word. Oscillators are typica1ly specified
by long-term and short-term stability in parts per million (ppm) over a given time.
Selection of this stability determines the allowable error in the onboard time between
time updates from the ground. The same stable oscillator may be used to provide other
oscillator frequencies to other spacecraft subsystems. Occasionally, the stability
needed by the other system may be the driving factor.
Maintaining time with the spacecraft computer is possible using internal registers
and a periodic interrupt signal. However, additional uncertainty may be induced due
to the nonsynchronous nature of a processor under interrupt control. Higher priority
interrupts may delay the update of the time word. If other subsystems need a time base,
the designer must include additional registered circuitry.
Computer Watchdog. When a spacecraft computer is used to provide decisionmaking capability on orbit, it is common to provide a method of determining a
computer failure independent of the processor itself. This function may be integrated
into the C&DH system and is usually referred to as the watchdog timer.
The watchdog timer ensures that the computer hardware and software functions as
planned. A hardware or software anomaly could be catastrophic to the spacecraft
mission if we don't provide a means of correcting the problem. Typica1ly, this function
uses one or more timers which must be reset by the onboard computer prior to timing
out The computer resets the timer by writing a specific data word to a specific address.
If this is not accomplished prior to the time-out, the watchdog will execute a predetermined recovery action. The recovery may be a computer reset, interrupt, or a disable
which is maintained until cleared by a ground command.
Attitude Control System Functions. Integrating attitude control functions into the
C&DH system may reduce the hardware required on the spacecraft by taking advantage of C&DH circuitry that is available in other subsystems. The integration of
command, telemetry and onboard computer functions allows closed-loop monitoring
and control with the addition of interface channels specific to the attitude control
function. These channels may be high current, high accuracy, or other special requirement interfaces. In some cases, the attitude control section provides only controlling
signals. with the high power and signal conditioning circuitry integrated into the
attitude control component
Spares. As the baseJining process continues, we develop an estimate of the 110
channel quantities, and use this estimate in step 3 to estimate system parameters.
Unfortunately, 110 channel quantities tend to increase, as the spacecraft becomes more
defined. 'nterefore, it is common practice to include 10% to 25% additional channels in
the count for unforeseen growth requirements. We should use the chaImel count,
including spares, to estimate system complexity in Table 11-28. This estimate must be

402

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.3

documented carefully to prevent several increases as the concept proceeds through the
various departments and levels of management involved in the spacecraft design. As
always, more hardware increases the cost, size, weight, and power of the system.
Step 2-Identify Reqnirements and COnstraints. Once the functions required by
the command and data handling system have been determined, requirements and
constraints imposed by external factors must be identified. We don't control these
requirements and constraints and they may affect one or more aspects of the C&DH
system design. Early identification and response to these issues may minimize the cost
impact and design problems.
Spacecraft Bus Constraints. The physical size of a spacecraft and its design will
often direct the ultimate configuration of the command and data handling system. In
general, the C&DH system may be divided into three classes or architectures:
• Single-unit systems
• Multiple-unit, distributed systems
• Integrated systems
.A single-unit C&DH system provides one unit for the command system and one
urnt for the telemetry system or a single unit which integrates both functions. Although
the single-unit design may be simple and centralize functions, it can have a significant
disadvantage on a medium to large spacecraft bus. As mentioned previously, a larger
spacecraft will generally require a larger number of subsystems and associated interfaces and health monitors. A single-unit system requires every interface wire to be
routed to a single physical location for monitoring and control. The result can be a wire
harness that is larger than the unit itself and significantly impacts the weight budget
Multiple-unit C&DH systems provide a potential solution to this problem and
others. A inultiple-unit system provides "remote" command and data handling capabilities in locations physically removed from the "central" unit The number of
remotes is driven by the spacecraft bus design or the quantity of I/O channels. One
example is the design of a dual-spin satellite in which every signal must be transferred
between the spinning and fixed sections of the satellite over a slip-ring interface. Slip
rings limit the quantities of signals which may be practically routed and also complicate the design due to induced noise. One practical solution is to provide a remote unit
on the spinning side which communicates with the central unit over a digital data bus.
This allows the acquisition of hundreds of channels on the spinning side while requiring only 2 to 6 wires to pass through the slip rings.
Integrated C&DH systems typically combine command, telemetry, flight processing, :md.attitude. control in~ one system. These s~stems tend to be small LightSat-type
applIcations which use a smgle computer to momtor and control the satellite or a large
high-performance system which uses multiple computers and subsystems coordinated
by a central high-power processor. This type of system may provide a reduced hardware requirement and cost due to the increased capability provided by the processor.
However, this system will most likely entail increased software costs associated with
the increased programming requirements.
~e~iIity. The reliability required of the C&DH system will affect the system
desIgn m two areas: redundancy and parts quality. A low failure rate for the system
provides a high confidence factor in the success of the mission. Reliability is dramatically increased by including a redundant system for all mission-critical components.
Configuring a system in this manner will obviously increase the amount of hardware

11.3

Command and Data Handling

403

involved. More hardware means increasing the recurring cost, but not necessarily
double the total procurement cost Many cost items involved in manufacturing the
system are fixed whether a single-string or redundant system is built
Parts quality also affects the reliability of a system. Increasing the parts quality does
not increase the amount of hardware; however, it does significantly increase cost
specifying a Class "S" parts program (or indirectly requiring it via the reliability
requirement) typically multiplies the material cost by 400% to 500%.
Radiation. The areas affected most by the radiation requirement are cost and
schedule. System size and weight may be affected if we require shielding of elec~nic
components. A radiation environment limits the part ~ av~able to .th~ ~gn~
and system performance is typically lower due to required delating. Predicting ClICWt
behavior is accomplished by modeling, simulation, and analysis. Environment severity may double system development time and increase parts costs by a factor of 10.
rrogriun Constraints. The foundation of any hardware development program lies
in the constraints placed upon the program to carry out the mission. In some cases,
program constraints initially restrict a design so the desired mission cannot be accomplished. The budget allocated for the program ~ typically be the most limiting ~­
straint in the development of the spacecraft and, m tum, command and data handling•
Allocating a budget for a LightSat will clearly preclude developing a spacecraft and
support systems for a national-asset satellite.
If managers define a budget, it will become the primary driver in determining the
other elements of the definition process. In the case of a preliminary study, the objective may be to define the budget needed to achieve the desired mission goals. In this
case, the later steps become the determinant and the dollars needed become the output
of the process.
The second significant program constraint is commonly schedule. Most spacequalifJed electronic systems are custom designs or semicustom implementations of
existing hardware. The need dates for hardware may completely determine which
approach we take to develop hardware. Typical lead times for command and data
handling equipment are 12 to 18 months for systems using Class B parts and 24 to 30
months for systems using Class S parts. These schedule times are almost completely
driven by the lead time involved in the procurement of electronic piece parts. Therefore, a fast delivery requirement to support an urgent mission will affect the parts and
reliability level of the unit
Step 3-Determine the Complexity of C&DH Fnnctions. Table 11-28 may be
used to provide a fJrst-order estimate of the complexity.of each C&DH function. There
are no absolutes in this stage of the process. The estimate is the result of the C&DH
"feel" obtained by comparing known general requirements with those listed in the
table. The result is a bounding of the system definition into one of three zones. We
must define C&DH system drivers which may move the components between zones
in the case of an unclear definition. Once a determination is made on the function
complexities, steps 4 and 5 provide an estimate of the system size, weight, and power
specifications. As can be seen in the FireSat example, all the requirements do not have
to be defined to make a fJrst-order estimate.
Step 4-Determine Overall C&DH Level of Complexity. Functions described as
"other" are now collected into the command and telemetry components. Typically, the
mission time clock is included in the telemetry component The computer watchdog is
included in the command component because a computer failure often requires spacecraft reconfiguration via the command system. ACS functions are included in both.

,

I

: ,i

I

Spacecraft Subsystems

404

11.3

I

~

=

iiI:
EO

8)
ic1
e

8

i~ ~

~

~
~Q)2
"'.>0:

i

.l!l

~

ii:

~

~

.§

en

0"'1:
CD=

I:=s

~~IIS
CD-"D

0

~

::len

i~

.l!l

~

~

~j

.l!l0

Q."D
Ela

~

~

=-

E

e
'5

ii

si
"'CD
...
c

i

a:

~o'"

"D"DCDi
!E'S

"3o~Eo

~

"3
ii:
C"
CD
il50
~~
II:VlO v II:

.ee;;'< ~
"D! E~

!"D 0"D ~
"3la cCD .a
.0::1
WC)~s iii
:ii~o CDS ~E ~
C)
;;:l5o~ -egos ..c:
o .... cv l=S <~ :::J

s.:g

J

i
2CD
cj

..c:

cb- C c
e.g ~.9
.. C
'"
C
S 8 ~~ ::I
~ s 6-en .l!l
... 0 CDO C)

~GI

t

Ii

s~

=-

o~

!§
C\lQ!

~

c

~
"D

~

I

IX)

0)

ci

'0 1Jc
"D
0.9
~ -:g
C\I i"D
::!.. EE

~

jl

405

Command and Data Handling

11.3

Composite complexity is determined by scoring the functions complexity and
system drivers for each component (command and telemetry), giving the most weight
to system drivers. The F'treSat example appears to be satisfied with a "simple" system
approach with one exception. The high-speed payload data requirement must be
addresSed to prevent this requirement from becoming the system design driver. The
impact must be evaluated for the mission design. Potential solutions include a separate data link, onboard data compression to reduce bandwidth, and additional
research to determine if the 150 Mbps requirement is really needed to accomplish the
mission.
The reliability requirement specified for F'treSat causes a significant impact on the
system design and cost. To achieve the desired rating, the systems must be configured
redundantly and manufactured using Class S parts. This information. its impact and
alternatives, should be fed back into the mission design process as early as possible.
Step S-Estimate Size, Weight, and Power for Each Component. The results of
steps 3 and 4 may now be used in conjunction with Table 11-29 to obtain an estimate
of the system parameters. The "feel" of the system or the desired design margin will
determine the selected value within each zone.
TABLE 11-29. Parametric EstImatIon of. C&DH Size, Weight, and Power. Peak command
power wDI vary by command type, duration, and load. Nominal command power
wm be higher If ACS drivers are required.

FJreSat
Slze(cm3)

Weight (kg)

Simple

TypIcal

Complex

Baseline

Command only

1,500-3,000

2,000-4,000

5,OO(}-6,OOO

3,000

Telemetry only

1,500-3,000

4,()()(H),OOO

9,000-10,000

3,000

Combined

2,500-6,000

6,000-9,000

13,000-15,000

1.5-2.5

1.5-3.0

4.0-5.0

2.5
2.5

systems
Command only
Telemetry only

1.5-2.5

2.5-4.0

6.5-7.5

Combined

2.75-5.5

4.5-6.5

9.5-10.5

Command only

2

2

2

2

Telemetry only

5-10

10-16

13-20

10

Combined

7-12

13-18

15-25

systems

'E
;j
CD CD CD

.l!l

555
ccc eng

Power
(nominal) (W)

systems

Command and data handling systems are generally conservative, evolutionary
designs due to their mission-critical nature. The baselining process presented provides
the mission designer with an approach to making a first-order estimate of the necessary
hardware based upon previous hardware developments. This approach will provide a
realistic estimate to be used in mission resource budgeting.
It is important to identify the rationale and drivers for the baseline. If possible, each
specification should be allocated a rating or confidence factor to indicate if the specification is required, flext'ble, or merely a place holder. This information may allow the
mission design team more creativity in solving a given technical problem.

406

I,

I

Spacecraft Subsystems

1I-3

11.3.3 C&DH Basics
This section is a list of details of great concern to command and data handling
system. d~ign and opera~on. Many of these concems are of absolute necessity when
d~tc:nrunmg C&DH reqwrements and generating procurement specifications. EmphaSIS. IS :placed on the command system because of the severity of the effects if these
guIdelines are not followed. Data handling basics such as data rates and the number of
bits per sample are covered in Sec. 13.2.
. Interfaces to other equipment must be protected so that their faults do not propagate
mto the command decoder.
It is paramount that no commands or any transient signals appear on command
outputs during application or removal of prime power, or during underlover prime
power voltage conditions.
It is a basic philosophy of command decoder designs that if the integrity of a
c?mmand message. is in doubt, the command is not issued. It is rejected! This is espe_
CIally true when firing an ordnance device or the spacecraft is launched from a manned
vehicle. It is for this reason that received command messages are not corrected,
although the capability exists, using error check bits.
F?r safetr concerns, operations such as firing ordnance, an engine, or thruster,
~wre multiple commands configured in series forming a logical AND function. No
sIngle command causes the operation to occur. In a typical ordnance application, three
commands are required: safe, arm, and fire. In this case, safe and arm are relays that .
e~ab!e a high level discrete command, fire. The commands .must (shall) be isolated
~!hi» the command decoder such that no single component or physical failure results
I? Inadvertent function execution. To achieve this, the Hamming distance of controllIng command messages must be two or greater (for isolation in the decoding scheme)
and command outputs must be physically isolated to the greatest extent possible usin~
different decoding circuits and interface connectors.
. It is advi~ not to have any commands that turn a command decoder off during
flIght In addition, there should be no commands that interrupt the uplink source to the
command decoder.
. In.redun~t applications, where command outputs are cross strapped, the interface
CJrC~ts an~ Interconnection hav~ to be designed such that no single component or
phYSICal failure prevents the active output from functioning. Along the same lines
",,:he~ tele~try inputs a.nd serial interface outputs are cross strapped, the interfa~
CIrC~ts an~ Interconnections. have to be designed such that no single component or
phYSIcal failure prevents the Interface from functioning.
Th~ ri~ing .and falling edges of discrete command and serial telemetry outPuts are
often lImIted In frequency content so that they are not a source of noise emissions on
the spacecraft
11.3.4 A Fmal Note
The C&DH subsystem is often one of the last on the spacecraft to be defined. It is
a tool, used to configure, control, or program the payload and other spacecraft
subsystems. It is the spacecraft's senses reporting internal environment, health and
status information. C&DH equipment cannot be completely defined until the rec{uirements of other systems have been established. The mission designer's main task is that
~f listing the c.ommand, telemetry and other data needs for each spacecraft system. The
lISt must also Include the rate at which commands are issued and telemetry is gathered
for determination of composite data rates. Issues such as data format, encoding, and

11.4

Power

407

security must then be addressed. At this point it may be advantageous to stop and take
an overall view of the spacecraft for other functions, which if included in the C&DH,
would simplify overall design. Remember that the C&DH interfaces to nearly all
spacecraft functions. Next the impact of the mission environments, duration and
required reliability on the C&DH hardware is assessed. When these tasks are complete
the C&DH subsystem can be fully characterized.

11.4 Power
Joseph K. McDermott, Lockheed Martin Astronautics
As illustrated in Fig. 11-8, the electrical power subsystem (EPS) provides, stores,
distributes, and controls spacecraft electrical power. Table 11-30 lists typical functions
performed by the EPS. The most important sizing requirements are the demands for
average and peak electrical power and the orbital profile (inclination and altitude). We
must identify the electrical power loads for mission operations at beginning-oJ-life.
BOL, and end-oJ-life, EOL.
For many missions, the end-of-life power demands must be reduced to compensate
for solar array performance degradation. The average electrical power needed at EOL
determines the size of the power source. Section 10.3 shows a sample power budget
that we may use to begin the sizing process. We usually multiply average power by 2
or 3 to obtain peak power requirements for attitude control, payload, thermal, and EPS
(when charging the batteries). Fortunately, all the systems do Jiot require peak power
at the same time during the mission.

IE1ectrlca1 Power Subsystem I

I
Rg.11-8. Functional Breakdown for the Spacecraft's Power Subsystem. We start with
these four functions and must determine requirements for the hardware, software, and
Interfaces for eaeh.
TABLE 11-30. Typical Top-Level Power Subsystem Functions. Each of these functions
consists of subfunctions with a myriad design characteristics which we must
develop to meet mission requirements.
o Supply

a continuous source of electrical power to spacecraft loads during the mission life.
and distribute electrical power to the spacecraft.
o Support power requirements for average and peak electrlcalloacl.
o Provide conVerters for ae and regulated de power buses, if required.
o Provide command and telemetJy capability for EPS ~ and status, as weD as control
by ground station or an autonomous systEim.
~
o Protect the spacecraft payload against failures within the EPS.
o Suppress transient bus voltages and protect against bus faults.
o Provide ability to fire ordnanca, If required.
o Control

408

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.4

Tabl~ 11-31 s~ the.power subsystem design process, which we discu

~~r m th~ followmg subsections, and Table 11-32 shows the principal effects:

lD1SS1bn req~~en~ on the pow~r system design. We will work through the desi
gn
process, begmnmg WIth the selection of a power source.

TABLE 11-31. The PreRmlnary Design Process for the Power Subsystem. All of th
design steps must link back to mission requirements to satisfy the owner : :
users. No,te that derived requirements may Impact previous design decl I
force deSigners to iterate the design process.
sons and
Step

Information Required

1. Identify
Requirements

Top-level requirements,
mission type (LEO,
GEO), spacecraft
configuration, mission life,
payload definition

Design requirements,
spacecraft electrical
power profile (average
and peak)

Sees. 10.1,10.2

2. Select and
Size Power
Source

Mission type, spacecraft
configuration, average
load requirements for
electrical power

EOL power requirement,
type of solar ceO, mass
and
of solar array,
solar array configuration
(2-axis tracking panel,
body-mounted)

.Sees. 10.1,102

3. Select and
Size Energy
Storage

Mission orbital
Eclipse and load-leveling
parameters, average and energy storage
peak load requirements
requirement (battery
for electrical power
capacity requirement),
battery mass and volume,
battery type

4. Identify Power Power-source selection,
Regulation and mission life, requirements
Control
for regulating mission
load, and thermal-control
requirements

Derived Requirements

area

Peak-r:iower tracker or
dlrecl-energy-transfer
system, thermal-control
requirements, bus.
voltage quality, power
control algorithms

References

Table 10-9
Sec. 11.4.1
Table 11-34

Ssc.11.42
Tables 11-3,11-4,
11-38,11-39,11-40
Rg.11-11

Sec. 11.4.4

TABLE 11-32. Effects?f ~stem-Level Parameters on the Power Subsystem. Most aspects
of the mlssl~n affect the power subsystem bacause so many other subsyst
require specific power attnbutes.
ems
Parameter

Effects on DesIgn

Avelllge Electrical
Power Requirement

Sizes the powerlleneratlon system (e.g., number of solar cells primary
battery size) and possibly the energy-storage system given th; eclipse
period and depth of discharge
.

Peak Electrical
Power Required

~:: ~e )e~rgy-storage system (e.g., number of batteries, capacitor

Mission Life

Longer mission life (> 7 yr) implies extra redundancy design Independent battery charging, larger capacity batteries, and larger ~ys

Orbital Parameters

Def!nes Incident solar energy, eclipse/Sun periods and radiation
ellVlronment
'

Spacecraft

Sp~ner o/Pically implies body-mounted solar cens; 3-axis stabDlzed
typically II1lpnes body-fixed and deployable solar panels

Configuration

s e

the power-processing and distribution equipment

11.4

Power

11.4.1 power Sources
The power source generates electrical power within the spacecraft. Launch vehicles
such as Titan IV or Delta use primary batteries (discussed in Sec. 11.4.2) as the power
source for electrical loads because the batteries usually need to last less than an hour.
But batteries alone are too massive for missions that last from weeks to years. These
missions need a source that can generate power over many orbital cycles to support
electrical loads and recharge the batteries.
Typically, we use four types of power sources for spacecraft. Photovoltaic solar
cells, the most common power source for Earth-orbiting spacecraft, convert incident
solar radiation directly to electrical energy. Static power sources use a heat source
_typically plutonium-238 or uranium-235 (nuclear reactor), for direct thermal-toelectric conversion. Dynamic power sources also use a heat source-typically concentrated solar radiation, plutonium-238, or enriched uranium-to produce electrical
power using the Brayton, Stirling, or Rankine cycles. The fourth power source is fuel
cells, used on manned space missions such as Gemini, Apollo, SkyLab, and the Space
Shuttle. Table 11-33 provides a comparison of various power sources.
Static power conversion uses either a thermoelectric or a thermionic concept. The
most common static power source for spacecraft is the thermoelectric couple. This
basic converter uses the temperature gradient between the p-n junction of individual
thermoelectric cells connected in a series-parallel arrangement to provide the desired
dc electrical output from each converter. This temperature gradient comes from slow
decay of the radioactive source. The thermal-to-electric conversion efficiency for a
thermoelectric source istypica1ly 5-8%.
Thermionic energy conversion produces electricity through a hot electrode (emitter) facing a cooler electrode (collector) inside a sealed enclosure that typically
contains an ionized gas. Electrons emitted from the hot emitter flow across the interelectrode gap to the cooler collector. There they condense and return to the emitter
through the electrical load connected externally between the collector and the emitter.
We choose the collector and emitter temperatures for best overaII system performance.
In choosing the collector temperature, we try to decrease the weight and size of
thermal radiators, and we choose materials based on mission life requirements. Thermionic power sources usually rely on a reactor heat source because of the high
temperature required for efficient thennionic conversion. Power efficiencies for a
thermionic power conversion are typically 10--20%.
In contrast to static sources, dynamic power sources use a heat source and a heat
exchanger to drive an engine in a thermodynamic power cycle. The heat source can be
concentrated solar energy, radioisotopes, or a controlled nuclear-fission reaction. Heat
from the source transfers to a working fluid, which drives an energy-conversion heat
engine. For a dynamic solar-power source, the balance ofenergy remains as latent and
sensible heat in a heat exchanger (molten eutectic salt), which provides continuous
energy to the thermodynamic cycle during eclipse periods. A dynamic power source
using a nuclear reactor or plutonium-238 decay does not require thermal-energy storage because the source provides continuous heat.
Dynamic power sources use one of three methods to generate electrical power.
Stirling cycle, Rankine cycle, or Brayton cycle. Stirling-cycle engines use a singlephase working fluid as the working medium. The thermodynamic cycle consists of
two isothermal procesSes (compression and expansion) and two constant-volume pr0cesses (heating and cooling). Power-conversion efficiencies for Stirling engines are
25-30%. Rankine-cycle engines are dynamic devices that use a two-phase fluid system

i /.:

410

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.4

11.4

Power

411

, i

TABLE 11-33. MatrIx for Comparing Most Common Spacecraft Power Sources. We may
use different factors to select the correct power source but speci1lc power and
specific cost are used extensively.
EPS
Design
Parameters

Power Range (kW)
Specific Power (WJ1<g)
Specific Cost ($IW)
Hardness
- Natural Radiation
- Nuclear Threat
- Laser Threat
-Pellets

Solar
PhotovoHalc

Solar
Thermal
Dynamic

0.2-300
25-200

5-300

800-3.000

1,~2.000

9-15

RadiO.

Isotope
0.2-10
5-20
16K200K

Nuclear
Reactor

Fuel
Cell

5-300

0.2-50
275

2-40

4OOK700K

Insufficient

Data

Low-Medlum
Medium
Medium
Low

High
High
High
Medium

Very high
Very high
Very high
Very high

Very high
Very high
Very high
Very high

HIgh
HIgh
High
Medium

Stability and
Maneuverability

Low

Medium

High

High

High

Low-orblt Drag

High

High

Low

Medium
(due to
radlator)

Low

Degradation Over life

Medium

Medium

Low

Low

Low

Storage Required for
Solar EcOpse

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Sensitivity to
Sun Angle

MedIum

High

None

None

None

Sensitivity to
Spacecraft
Shadowing

Low
(with bypass
diodes)

High

None

None

None

Obstruction of
Spacecraft
Viewing

High

High

Low

MedIum
(due to
radiator)

None

Fuel Availability

Unlimited

UnHmlted

Very low

Very low

Medium

Safety Analysis
Reporting

Minimal

MInImal

Routine

Extensive

Routine

Low

Medium

MedIum

High

Medium

Earth-orbltlng
spacecraft

Interplanetary,
Earth-orbltlng
spacecraft

Interplanetary

Interplanetary

Interplanetary

IR Signature
PrIncipal

Applications

empl~ying a ~iler, turbine, alternator, condenser, and pump. This power-conversion
cycle IS essentlal1y the same as that used to generate electricity from fossil and nuclear
energy on Earth. Power-conversion efficiencies for Rankine-cycle engines are
15-20%. Brayton-cycle engines are dynamic devices that use a single, compressible
working fluid as the working medium. The thermodynamic cycle consists of adiabatic
compression and expansion stages separated and coupled by stages that add or reject
~ at constant pressure. Placed after the turbine, a recuperator-heat exchanger
Improves the c:ycle's efficiency. Power conversion efficiencies for the Brayton cycle
are 2.0-35%.

Fuel cells convert the chemical energy of an oxidation reaction to electricity. They
are self-contained generators that operate continuously without sunlight, but must
carry their own reactant supply, usually. The longer the mission, the larger the reactant
tanks. The most popular version for space applications is the hydrogen-oxygen
(referred to as "alkaline" because of the KOH electrolyte) ~el cell because of its
relatively high specific power (275 W/kg on the Space Shuttle), low reactant mass
(hydrogen and oxygen); and useful by-product (water).
.
A typical single cell produces a voltage of 0.8 Vdc. In combination, a fuel cell unit
can create many kilowatts of power (each Shuttle fuel cell produces 16 kW peak or
12 kW continuous). The energy conversion efficiency can run as high as 80% for low
current draws, but as current increases, the efficiency drops to 50-60%, due to activation overpotential and electrical resistance in the electrolyte solution between electrodes. However, compared with other power sources, fuel cell efficiencies are bigh.
The three Space Shuttle fuel cells are state-of-the-art power generators that produce
all of the Shuttle electricity for the 28 Vdc bus. Their high efficiency (70%), low
weight (118 kg), and excellent reliability (> 99% available) attest to their quality.
Other important factors are their IS-min start-up time, instantaneous shutdown, and
long lifetime (2,400 hours before refurbishment). Besides electricity, these fuel cells
produce crew drinking water, at a rate of 0.36 kg/kWh, or about 104 kg a day.·
Research is underway to solve the short-mission limit with fuel cells, caused by
carrying large reactant masses. Because the fuel-cell reaction is reversible, we can use
electrolysis to create more reactants from the water by-product To optimize each pr0cess, however, we have to use separate units for generating electricity and separating
the water. Any long-duration mission could use this regenerative system if it had some
input electricity from solar cells, nuclear generators, or other power system during
periods of low electrical load.
Earth-orbiting spacecraft at low-Earth to geosynchronous orbits have usually
employed photovoltaics as their power source. Often, photovoltaics were the only real
candidate for these low-power missions (less than 15 kW) because solar cells were
well-known and reliable. Photovoltaic sources are not attractive for interplanetary
missions to the outer planets because solar radiation decreases, thus reducing the available energy from a solar array. To configure and size a solar array, we must understand
cell types and characteristics; solar-array design issues, types, sizing calculations, configurations, regulation; and radiation and thermal environments. Key design issues for
solar arrays include spacecraft configuration, required power level (peak and average),
operating temperatures, shadowing, radiation environment, illumination or orientation, mission life, mass aDd area, cost, and risk. Table 11-34 shows the solar array
design process.
Step 1. Mission life and the average power requirement are the two key design
considerations in sizing the solar array for most spacecraft. We size a photovoltaic
system to meet power requirements at EOL, with the resulting solar array often oversized for power requirements at BOL. This excess power at BOL requires coordinated
systems engineering to avoid thermal problems. The longer the mission life, the larger
the difference between power requirements at EOL and BOL. We usually consider
photovoltaics a poor power source for missions lasting more than 10 years because of
natural degradation in the solar array. Section 11.4.4 discusses how we manage excess
power from the solar array. The average power requirement can be obtained from
Sees. 10.1 and 10.2.
• Telephone conv.ersation with Jay Garrows, International Fuel Cells, Inc., Oct. 98.

I'

412

Spacecraft Subsystems

TABLE 11-34. Solar Array Design Process. In the AreSat example column, Id represents
inherent degradation, 8 is ~ ~un incidence angle, Ld Is life degradation, and X
and Xd represent the effiCIencIes of the power distribution paths. The rnateri~
following the table further explains these quantities.
Step

Reference

F1reSat Example

1. Determine requirements
and constraints for power
subsystem solar array
design
• Average power required Input parameter,
during daylight and
Sees. 10.1, 102
eclipse

110 W during daylight
and eclipse

• Orbit altitude and
eclipse duration

Input parameter,
endpapers

700km
35.3 min

• Design lifetime

Chaps. 2,3

5yr

2. Calculate amount of power Step 1
that must be produced by
Eq. 5-5, end papers
the solar arrays, Psa
(Orbit period - 78)

*Multijunction:
Po = 0.22 X 1,367 W/rn2

=301 W/rn2
Table 11-35
Eq.5-7
Eq.11-6

5. Determine the end-of-life
(EOl) power production
capability, PEOL , for the
solar array

Performance degradation
SI: 3.75% per yr,
GaAs: 2.75% per yr,
Multijunction: 0.5% per yr
Eq.11-7
Eq.11-8

6. Estimate the Solar array
Eq.11-9
area, Asa , required to
produce the necessary
power, Psa , based on PEOL
an altemate approach
Eq.10-12t
7. Estimate the mass of the
soler array

Eq.10-131

Id= 0.77

8 = 23.5 deg (worst case)
PSOL = 143 W/m2
Performance degradation Is
3.75% per year

Let = 0.826 for 5 yr mission
PEOL = 118.1 W/rn2
Asa=2.0 m2

'Asa = 2.5 rn2
Ma= 9.6 kg

8. Document assumptions
,

I

* ~~nstrated efficiencIes for SI, GaAs, and multljunctlon solar cells are 14.8"/0, 18.5%, end 22%,

t Use Psa In these equations.

In designing a solar array, we trade off mass, area, cost, and risk. Silicon presently
costs the least for most photovoltaic power applications, but it often requires larger
area arrays and more mass than the more costly gallium-arsenide cells. Programs for
which mass and volume (solar array area) are critical issues may allow higher costs or
technical risks. They could select a system based on gallium arsenide or some other
advanced type of solar cell. Risk develops from the unproven reliability and fabrication of the photovoltaic source.
A solar array's illumination intensity depends on orbital parameters such as the Sun
incidence angles, eclipse periods, solar distance, and concentration of solar energy.
Tracking and pointing mechanisms on the solar array often adjust for these influences.
If we mount the cells on the body of the spacecraft, we must orient them so they will
generate adequate power throughout the mission.
Step 2. To estimate the solar-array area required for a spacecraft, we first determine
how much power, Psa ' the solar array must provide during daylight to power the
spacecraft for the entire orbit

78 = 35.3 min
7d = 63.5 min

3. Selecttype of soler cell and ·Si: Po - 0.148 X 1,367 W/rn2
Si solar cells
estimate power output, Po,
=202W/rn2
Po = 202 W/rn2
with the Sun normal to the *GaAs: Po = 0.185 X 1,367 W/rn2
surface of the cells
= 253 W/rn2

4. Determine the beginningof-life (BOl) power production capability, PSOL '
per unit area of the array

413

Pe = Pct = 110W
'Assume a peak power trackIng regulation scheme with
Xe = 0.6 and Xd = 0.8
Psa = 239.4 W

Eq.11-5

Power

11.4

Psa

PeTe + I:J7d)
( Xe
Xd

= -"--=----=~

(11-5)

7d

where Pe and Pd are the spacecraft's power requirements (excluding regulation and
battery charging losses) during eclipse and daylight, respectively, and Te and Td are
the lengths of these periods per orbit. The terms Xe and Xd represent the efficiency of
the paths from the solar arrays through the batteries to the individual loads and the path
directly from the arrays to the loads, respectively. The efficiency values for eclipse and
daylight depend on the type of power regulation: direct energy transfer or peak-power
tracking. (A description of these methods follows in Sec. 11.4.4.) For direct energy
transfer, the efficiencies are about Xe =0.65 and Xd =0.85; for peak-power tracking
they are Xe =0.60 and Xd =0.80. The efficiencies of the former are about 5% to 7%
greater than the latter because peak-power tracking requires a power converter
between the arrays and the loads.
Step 3. Table 11-35 shows the efficiencies and radiation-degradation sensitivities
of three main types of cells. Gallium arsenide has the advantage of higher efficiencies,
whereas indium phosphide reduces the degrading effects of radiation. Silicon solar cell
technology is mature and has the advantage of lower cost per watt for most applications. Gallium arsenide and indium phosphide cost about 3 times more than silicon.
The energy-conversion efficiency of a solar cell is defined as the power output
divided by the power input. The power input value for a planar solar array is the solarillumination intensity (1,367 W/m2). Thus, a solar panel with a BOL efficiency of 18%
will provide 246 W/m2• We must be aware that reported efficiency values for solar
panels often apply only to single cells. We need to identify losses inherent to panel
assembly (diodes, interconnect cabling, transmission losses) to size the array adequately. We also need to note that these efficiency values often refer to laboratory
cells and not production cells, which have lower average efficiencies.
To complete this step. we identify the type of solar cells and how their performance
will degrade during the mission. Ideally, silicon and gallium arsenide solar cells have
efficiencies of about 14.8% and 18.5%. These solar cell efficiencies give us ideal solar
cell output perforinance per unit area, Po, of 202 W/m2 and 253 W/m2, respectively,
if the incident solar radiation (1,367 W1m2) is normal to the surface.

414

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.4

Power

11.4

TABLE 11-35. Performance Comparison for PhotoYoltalc Solar Cells. Note that the stated
efficiencies are for single solar cells, not solar arrays.
Cell Type
Planar cell
. theoreUcaJ efficiency

Silicon

ThIn Sheet
Amorphous SI

Gallium
Arsenide

20.8"k

12.0%

23.5%

25.8%

AchIeved efficiency:
Production
Best laboratory

14.8%
2O.8"k

Equivalent time in
geosynchronous orbit
for 15% degradation
- 1 MeV electrons
-10 MeV pro1ons

10yr
4yr

5.0%
10%

18.5%
21.8"k

10yr
4yr

33yr
6yr

18"k
19.9%

155yr
89yr

22.0%
25.7%

33yr
6yr

Step 4. Next, we must determine the reaUsti,:! power production capability of the
manufactured solar array. As shown in Table 11-36, an assembled solar array is less
efficient than single cells due to design inefficiencies, shadowing and temperature
variations, collectively referred to as inherent degradation, ld. Solar cells are applied
to a substrate, usually honeycomb aluminum, and interconnected, resulting in losses
of 10% of the solar array's substrate area. This accounts for the design and assembly
losses. H we configure the spacecraft well, its appendages will shadow few cells and
shadowing losses should be slight. The temperature of a typical flat solar panel ~iv­
ing normal incident radiation ranges from about 67°C in LEO to 53 °c in GEO. The
reference temperature for silicon solar cells is 28°C, with perfomulnce faIling off
0.5% per degree above 28°C. Body-mounted arrays on nonspinning spacecraft are
typically about 5 °c warmer than deployed solar arrays because they can't radiate heat
into deep space as efficiently.

Peak
Power
Point

1.50

indium
MulUJuncHon
Phosphide GalnP/GaAs
22.8"/0

415

1.25

i

~Isc

1.00 t-

!1:

0.75

-

(,)

0.50

-

~
:I

EOl

BOl

0.25 r
0

I
0

25

i
50

I

I

I

75

100

125

J
150

175

200

Voltage (V)
FIg. 11-9. I-V Plot for a Planar Array. The power available is simply the area under the curve.

We must also consider how temperature affects the I-V characteristics. While the
spacecraft is in eclipse, the solar-array temperature can get as.low as -80 °C.
highest operating temperature for an LEO spacecraft solar array IS 100 oC, occmnng near
the end of a full Sun period during an orbit.
The operating temperature of the array is a key issue because the solar cell's performance depends on temperature. A current-voltage, or I-V plot, illustrates the
performance of a solar-array cell, or the array (see Fig. 11-9). A change in the operating temperature of the solar cell or array causes three changes in the I-V curve:

T?e

• A scaling of the I-V curve along the current axis
TABLE 11-36. Elements of Inherent Solar Array DegradaUon. Although indMduat solar cells

may have adequate efficiency, after we manufacture the solar array, these
elements ceuse some degradation in the cumulative efficiency by the amounts
indicated.
Elements of Inherent Degradation

Nominal

Range

Design and Assembly

0.85

0.77-0.90

Temperature of Array

0.85

0.80-0.98

Shadowing of eeHs

1.00

0.80-1.00

Inherent Degradation, Id

0.77

0.49-0.88

As mentioned earlier, we commonly refer to the current-voltage characteristics of
a solar cell as the I-V curves. Figure 11-9 depicts a first-quadrant I-V rurve for a
planar array in LEO. This curve characterizes BOL and EOL performance. As the
figure illustrates, the three significant points for solar-array design are:

• Short-circuit current, lSI:' where voltage = 0
• Peak-power point, where voltage times current is maximized
• Open-circuit voltage,

\he,

where current =0

• A translation or shifting of the I-V curve along the voltage axis
• A change in the I-V curve shape affecting the roundness of the knee region
The temperature coefficient, or percent degradation of performance with increasing
temperature, for any solar cell depends on factors such as the type of cell and its
output-power characteristics, actual operating temperature, and radiation en~­
ment. GaIlium arsenide and indium phosphide have lower temperature coeffiCIents,
but higher temperature stiII means reduced performance. Solar arrays using ga1Iium
arsenide and indium phosphide also resist radiation better than silicon and provide
greater EOL power for a given area. We must establish a profile for operating temperatures during a mission, so the photovoltaic system can generate adequate power
throughout.
The peak-power point depends on the array's operating temperature at BOL and
EOL. Thus, an array often provides maximum power coming out of an eclipse period
because it is at its coldest operating temperature. Transient voltage excursions often
occur when leaving eclipse, so we may need to clamp voltages to protect spacecraft
loads. By understanding how the array's performance relates to these variables, we can
get the highest output power from the array.
Usually, solar cells in series-parallel combinations make up a solar array. The
number of series-connected solar cells in one string establishes the bus voltage

416

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.4

required at EOL at the operating temperature; the number of parallel strings depends
on the required current output. Isolation diodes mounted within the solar array
typically minimize the effects of shadowing and reversed-biased solar cells.
Solar-array configurations are either planar or concentrator,and either type can be
body- or panel-mounted. Most photovoltaic applications to date have employed a
planar array in which solar cells are mounted onto a surface (typically insulated aluminum honeycomb) with an adhesive. A Kapton, Kevlar, or fiberglass sheet usually
insulates the solar cell from the aluminum honeycomb support structure. Concentrator
solar arrays increase the solar cell's output by using mirrors or lenses to focus more
solar radiation on the cells.
Panel-mounted solar arrays usually apply only to 3-axis stabilized spacecraft. The
panel-mounted approach tracks and points the solar array to get the best Sun incidence
angle. The body-mou~te<;f approach ~uces the requirements ~or tracking and pointing
on ~y spacecraft (spmrung or stabilized). But the less effective Sun incidence angle
and InCreased array temperature of body-mounted cells produce a lower efficiency in
orbit. Panel-mounted solar arrays are usually mounted on a boom. Deployable panel
arrays are either flexible or rigid, according to the type of substrate material employed
for mounting. For most spacecraft. we try to place the solar array away from the
payload and other spacecraft subsystems because of the variable and often high
temperature of the solar cells.
Body-mounted planar cells are typical on spinning spacecraft, which provide thermal control by radiating excess heat to space as the spacecraft spins. Body-mounted
solar arrays use cells inefficiently because of higher temperature and reduced voltage.
Thus, they generate lower power per unit area than a deployed, oriented panel. When
solar cells are body-mounted to a spinning spacecraft, the array's total output power
decreases because the cells are not alway.s oriented toward the Sun. This decrease
~epends on the spacecraft's configuration and the drive mechanisms of the solar array
(If any). For example, a stabilized array using Sun-tracking and pointing on two axes
would fully use the solar array's surface area. But the array's reduction in output
power per total surface area would be approximately 1t for body-mounted cells on a
cylindrical, spinning spacecraft and 4 for body-mounted cells on a cubic-shaped
spacecraft that does not employ active tracking. The output power decreases because
not all cells are illuminated. We must trade the cost and design for the solar array's
to~ surf~ce area against the cost and complexity of stabilizing the spacecraft and
USIng a drive system for the solar array.
Shadowing considerations are important because it solar cell will go into open
circuit (become high resistance) when not illuminated. In a series-connected string of
solar cells, the shadowing of one cell results in the loss of the entire string. Shadowing
may be caused by spacecraft components such as transmitting or receiving antennas,
deployment mechanisms, or structures such as the solar-array. We can reduce shadowing effects by actively pointing and tracking solar arrays on 3-axis stabilized spacecraft, using diodes, or designing series-parallel arrays. On spinning spacecraft, we
must layout solar cells so all solar cells within a string are illuminated. Diodes, which
bypass groups of solar cells in a string, help prevent damage to reduce the advance
effects of shadowed solar cells.
We can improve solar cell performance with coverslides, coatings, and backsurface reflectors. Coverslides provide a hermetic seal yet allow the cell to receive
sunlight and reject heat. They are textured or smooth. A textured coverslide is used for
body-mounted solar cells that do not actively point toward the Sun. It reflects incident

Power

11.4

417

solar energy back onto the solar cell, improving the overall efficiency. Smooth coverslides are used for spacecraft whose arrays actively track and point By decreasing
reflective losses on solar cells, coatings allow cells to use more of the incident energy.
Back-surface reflectors direct incident solar radiation that passes through the solar cell
back through the cell again to improve overall efficiency. By reducing solar abs~
tance. they help the solar array manage thermal energy. Solar-cell vendors are
continually improving the mechanical and thermal characteristics of coverslides, coatings, and back-surface reflectors. Thus, we must coordinate mechanical and thermal
characteristics of these cells with the vendors.
At beginning-of-life, the array's power per unit area is
(11-6)
where cos 6 is referred to as the cosine loss. We measure the Sun incidence angle. 6,
between the vector normal to the surface of the array and the Sun line. So if the Sun's
rays are perpendicular to the solar array's surface, we get maximum power. Obviously,
the geometry between the array and the Sun changes throughout the mission and
different solar array panels will have different geometry. We configure the solar array
to minimize this cosine loss. For example, in OED with a flat, silicon solar array and
a worst-case Sun angle of 9 23.5 deg angle between equatorial and ecliptic planes
and the nominal value of -'d, the power output at beginning-of-life is 143 W/m2.
Step 5. Radiation damage severely reduces a solar array's output voltage and current At geosynchronous altitude, we must guard against solar-flare protons on-station,
trapped electrons on-station, and trapped electrons and protons during transfer orbits.
(Chapter 8 explains these terms.) Electrons and protons trapped in the Earth's magnetic field cause most degradation of solar cells. Silicon solar cells protected by
coverslides lose 15% of their voltage and current (shielding assumed) when exposed
to a total fluenee of 1015 MeV equivalent electrons (4 to 5 years for a LEO spacecraft).
A.s mission planners, we should coordinate degradation characteristics with the solarcell manufacturer, based on the radiation environment the spacecraft will encounter.
Degradation of a solar cell also depends on its design. Advanced technologies, such as
indium phosphide cells, are more radiation hardened.
Next, we must consider the factors that degrade the solar array's performance
during the mi.ssion. Life degradation, Ld' occurs because of thermal cycling in and out
of eclipses, micrometeoroid strikes, plume impingement from thrusters, and material
outgassing for the dmation of the mi.ssion. In general, for a silicon solar array in LEO.
power production can decrease by as much as 3.75% per year, of which up to 2.5% per
year is due to radiation. For gallium-arsenide cells in LEO, the degradation is about
2.75% per year, of which radiation causes 1.5% per year. The actual lifetime degradation can be estimated using

=

Ld= (1- degradationlyr)saleUite life

(11-7)

The array's performance per unit area at end-of-life is
PEOL

=PBOL Ld

(11-8)

Using the FueSat exanIple array in Table 11-34 for a 5-year mi.ssion, Ld is 82.6%, resulting in a PEOL of 118.1 WJm2. The solar-array area, Asa. required to support the
spacecraft's power requirement, Psa' is
Asa = Psa IPEOL

(11-9)

'I,'I'

i

418

Spacecraft Subsystems

1L4

The resulting solar-array area for the example spacecraft is about 2.0 m 2• If we had
used a perfectly pointed array, the BOL power would have been 155 W/m2, resulting
in an EOL power of 128 W/m2 and an array area of 1.9 m 2• So, having to account for
the cosine loss costs us 0.1 m 2 in array size and the equivalent mass.
Solar-array sizing is more difficult than it appears from the above discussion.
Typically, we must consider several arrays with varying geometry. Also, the angle of
incidence on the array surface is constantly changing. We must predict that angle CODtinuously or at least determine the worst-case angle to develop an estimate of PEOL '

Power

11.4

1<01
....
1 - - - - Charge

TABLE 11-37. Issues In Designing the Energy Storage Capability. Energy storage usually
means large batteries and we must consider all their characteristics when
designing this subsystem.
Physical

Size, weight, configuration, operating position, static and dynamic environments

Electrical

Voltage, current loading, duty cycles, number of duty cycles, activation time and
storage time, and Omits on depth-of-dlscharge

Programmatic Cost, shelf and cycle ute, mission, reUablDty, malntalnablDty, and produceabDity

Figure 11-10 highlights the charge-discbarge characteristics of a spacecraft's
energy-storage system. We want a flat discharge curve that extends through most of
the capacity and little overcharge. Overcharging quickly degrades most batteries. We
also need to match the electrical characteristics of the battery cells. Otherwise, charge
imbalances may stress and degrade the batteries, resulting in a shorter life for the
electrical-power subsystem.
All battery cells are either primary or secondary. Primary battery cells convert
chemical energy into electrical energy but cannot reverse this conversion, so they cannot be recharged. Primary batteries typically apply to short missions (less than one
day) or to long-term tasks such as memory backup, which use very little power. The

..

-----1.~il ~I---- Discharge Phase -------I--"~

Minimal
Overcharge
f- -

-

';;;W;; Cu"rre-;rt -

11.4.2 Energy Storage
Energy storage is an integral part of the spacecraft's electrical-power subsystem
providing all the power for short missions « 1 week) or back-up power for longer
missions (> 1 week). Any spacecraft that uses photovoltaics or solar thermal dynamics
as a power source requires a system to store energy for peak-power demands and
eclipse periods. Energy storage typically occms in a battery, although systems such as
flywheels and fuel cells have been considered 'for various spacecraft.
A battery consists of individual cells connected in series. The number of cells
required is determined by the bus-voltage. The amount of energy stored within the battery is the ampere-hour capacity or watt-hour (ampere-hour times operating Voltage)
capacity. The design or nameplate ~pacity of the battery derives from the energystorage requirements. Batteries can be connected in series to increase the voltage or in
parallel to increase this current output-tbe net result being an increase in watt-hour
capacity.
Table 11-37 lists issues to consider early in the conceptual phase of any program.
Most of all, we try to provide a stable voltage for all operating conditions during the
mission life because load users prefer a semi-regulated bus voltage. The difference in
energy-storage voltage between end of charge and end of discharge often determines
the range of this bus voltage.

Phase

419

I

1
II

~-

Stable Discharge Voltage
(AatCurve)

-

-Negati-;

C;;;; - - - -

I
Fig. 11-10.

ProfIle of ChargeIDlscharge Voltages for Batteries. Secondary batteries may cycle
through this type of profile hundreds or thOusands of times during their mission DIe. At
the left edge, the voltage Is low because the spacecraft just ceme out of eclipse where
It used battery power. During the charge phase, there Is positive current from the
power regulator, so the battery voltage rises. In the discharge phase (In eclipse again),
there Is a negative current, so the battery voltage decreases.

most common batteries use silver zinc, lithium thionyl chloride, lithium sulfur dioxide,
lithium monoflouride, and thermal cells. Table 11-38 highlights the applications and
relative merits. It also depicts the wide ranges in each couple's specific-energy
density. We cannot specify a value for specific-energy density because cells vary in
design and depend on mission requirements. We must coordinate mission requirements with the battery manufacturer to specify battery performance.
TABLE 11-38. Characteristics of Selected Primary Batteries. Primary battery manufacturers
can meet power requirements within these ranges of specific energy density. We
must tradeoff cost and mass with capacity whOe ensuring mission accomplishment
Primary
Battery Couple

Specmc Energy
Density
(W'hrlkg)

Typical
Application

Silver Zinc

60-130

High rate, short rife (minutes)

Uthlum Thionyl Chloride

175-440

Medium rate, moderate life « 4 hours)

Uthium Sulfur Dioxide

130-350

Uthium Monoflouride

130-350

low/medium rate, long life (days)
Low rate, long life (months)

Thermal

90-200

High rate, very short life (minutes)

A secondary battery for energy storage can convert chemical energy into electrical
energy during discharge and electrical energy into chemical energy during charge. It
can repeat this process for thousands of cycles. Table 11-39 shows ranges of specificenergy density for common secondary batteries. A secondary battery provides power

I~ ~!~
:!,
,

~I'

:

420

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.4

Power

11.4

421

'

I
j

during eclipse periods on spacecraft that employ photovoltaics and can also level
loads. Secondary batteries recharge in sunlight and discharge during eclipse. The
spacecraft's orbital parameters, especially altitude, determine the number of
charge/discharge cycles the batteries has to support during the mission life. A geosynchronous satellite needs to store energy for two 45-day eclipse periods per year with
eclipses lasting no more than 72 min each day. The geosynchronous orbit demands
few charge/discharge cycles during eclipse periods, thus allowing a fairly high (50%)
depth-of-discharge. On the other hand, LEO spacecraft encounter at most one eclipse
period each orbit or about 15 eclipse periods per day, with maximum shadowing of approximately 36 min. Therefore, the batteries must charge and discharge about 5,000
times each year, and the average depth-of-discharge is only 15-25%-much lower
than for geosynchronous spacecraft.
TABLE 11-39.

100

80

..... 60

ec
o
C

Secondary
, Battery Couple

'"

~

""
40

Nickel

'" ~Hymogen

'" ,

eadrnlurri'

" '-,

20

Characteristics of Selected Secondary Batteries. Though secondary batteries have much lower speciflc energy densities than primary batteries, their
ability to be recharged makes them ideal for backup power on spacecraft
powered by solar ceDs.
Specific Energy
Density
(W·hrlkg)

"-

'"
"

1111

103

1111

10 4

Cycle LHe (Cycles)
Fig. 11-11.
Status

Nickel-Cadmium

25-30

Space-quaJifled, extensive database

Nlckel-Hydrogen
(Individual pressure vessel design)

35-43

Space-quaJllled, good database

Nickel-Hydrogen
(common pressure vessel design)

40-56

Space-quaJified for GEO
and planetary

Nickel-Hydrogen
(single pressure vessel design)

43-57

Space-quaJified

Uthlum-Ion
(US02 • UCF, USOCI2 )

70-110

Under development

Sodium-Sulfur

140-210

Under development

Depth-aI-discharge (DOD) is simply the percent oftotal battery capacity removed
during a discharge period. Higher percentages imply shorter cycle life as shown in
Fig. 11-11. Once we know the number of cycles and the average depth of discharge,
we can determine the total capacity of the batteries.
Figure 11-11 illustrates the relationship between average depth-of-discharge
(DOD) and cycle life for secondary batteries using nickel cadmium (NiCd) and nickel
hydrogen (NiHU. Extensive data supports the predictions for both NiCd and NiH2.
The NiCd battery is still a common secondary energy storage system for many
aerospace applications. NiCd technology has been space qualified. and we have extensive databases for nearly any mission. A 28 Vdc aerospace NiCd battery usually
consists of 22-23 series-connected cells. NiCd battery cells for aerospace missions
have typical capacities of 5 to 100 Amp-hr.
NiH2 technology has been the recently qualified energy storage system of choice
for aerospace applications where higher specific energies and longer life are important The three space-qualified design configurations for NiH2 are individual pressme
vessel, common pressure vessel, and single pressme vessel. The individual pressme
vessel was the first NiH2 technology used for aerospace application. Here, only a
single electrochemical cell is contained within the pressme vessel. It has a working

Depth-of-Dlscharge vs. Cycle LHe for Secondary Batteries. Increased cycle life
reduces the amount of energy available from the batteries during each cycle-DOD
decreases with cycle life.

terminal voltage of 1.22 to 1.25 Vdc depending upon discharge loads. The typical
individual pressure vessel battery design consists of multiple cells connected in series
to obtain the desired battery voltage. Cell diameters are typically 9 to 12 em, with capacity ranges from 20 to over 300 Amp-hr. The common pressure vessel NiH2 technology is very similar to individual pressme vessel, with the primary difference in the
wiring connection of the internal electrode stacks. In the individual pressure vessel, the
electrode stacks are all connected in parallel. In a common pressure vessel, there are
two sets of electrode stacks within the pressure vessel that are series connected, yielding a working terminal voltage of 2.44 to 2.50 Vdc. This design has a higher specificenergy at the battery level since there are half as many pressure vessels and a significant reduction in cell piece-parts. Common pressure vessel NiH2 technology has been
space qualified in the 6 cm and 9 cm cell diameter configuration for capacities in the
12 to 20 Amp-hr range. Batteries with larger Amp-hr capacities should be qualified for
aerospace application in the near future. The single pressure vessel NiH2 battery is designed such that a common hydrogen supply is used by three or more series connected
cells with a single pressure vessel. Each cell stack contains its own electrolyte supply
which is isolated within individual cell stack containers. The key operating characteristic of this design is to allow the free movement of hydrogen within the cell stacks
while maintaining cell stack electrolyte isolation. These batteries are presently available in a 125 em or 25 cm diameter design.
Lithium Ion battery technology offers a significant energy density advantage and a
much wider operating temperature range over NiCd and NiH2 battery types. Typical
cell constituents are lithium thionyl chloride, lithium sulfur dioxide, and lithium
carbon monofluoride. The nominal operating voltage for a lithium ion cell is 3.6 to
3.9 Vdc, which allows us to reduce the number of cells by approximately one-third
When compared to NiCd or NiH2 cells. The lithium ion secondary battery system
offers a 65% volume advantage and a 50% mass advantage for most present day
aerospace battery applications. Lithium ion battery technology should be qualified for

422

Spaceciaft Subsystems

11.4

a planetary mission by the year 2000, with space qualification for GEO and LEO
applications by the years 2005-2010.
To size a secondary battery, we must identify the parameters and apply the equation
in Table 11-40. The parameter values used in the equation can vary significantly with
battery type. The ideal battery capacity is the average eclipse load, Pe , times the
eclipse duration, Te. This ideal capacity must be increased to include the battery-toload transmission efficiency, n, and the depth-of-discharge constraints. For LEO, we
expect the battery's DOD to be 40--60% for NiH2 technology, compared to 1{}:-20%
for NiCd technology. We base these expectations on the average DOD over 24 hours
and assume the batteries are fully recharged at least once during this period. The
number of batteries, N, may be equal to one for this calculation if you simply require
a battery capacity. Two to five batteries are typical. We must have at least two (unless
the battery uses redundant cells) because the spacecraft needs redundant operation
with one unit failed. But more than five batteries require complex components for
recharging. The secondary batteries may be required to help meet peak power loads
during full Sun conditions. For some missions, the peak power loads may drive the
required battery capacity rather than the eclipse load. To design the Energy-Storage
subsystem, follow the steps in Table 11-40
TABLE 11-40. Steps In the Energy Storage Subsystem Design. To obtain the required
battery capacity In Amp-hr. divide by the required satellite bus voltage.
Step
1. Determine the
energy storage
requirements

Consider
• M"lSSlon length
• Primary or secondary
power storage
• Orbital parameters
- Eclipse frequency
- Eclipse length
• Power use profile
- Voltage and current
- Depth of discharge
- Duty cycles
• Battery charge/discharge
cycle limits

F1reSet Example
·5yrs
• Secondary power storage

• 16 eclipses per day
·35.3 min per eclipse (Te)
• Eclipse load 110 W (Pe)
- 26.4 V. 42 A (max)
.20% (upper limit)
• TBD-depends on observations taken
and downlinked during ecnpses

2. Select the type
of secondary
batteries

• NiCd (space quaDfied)
• NIH2 (space quaflfled)
• U-Ion (under development)
• NaS (under development)

• NICd or NIH2-both are spacequa/med and have adequate
characteristics

3. Determine
the size of
the batteries
(battery capacity)

• Number of batteries
• Transmission efficiency
between the battery
and the load

• N = 3 batteries (nonredundant)
·n=O.90
·C,=119W-hr
• C,= 4.5 Amp-hr (26.4 V bus)

p.T.

Battery Capacity: C, = (DC:Di'Nn W-hr (for battery capacity In Amp-hr. divide by bus voltege)

11.4

Power

423

11.4.3 Power Distribution
A spacecraft's power distn'bution system consists of cabling, fault protection, and
switching gear to tum power on and off to the spacecraft loads. It also includes
command decoders to command specifi~ load relays on or off. The power distrib~ti"!l
system is a unique feature of the electrIcal-power subsystem and often reflects individual spacecraft loads and power-switching requireme~ts: Power distri~ution designs
for various power systems depend on source characteristics, load reqwrements, and
subsystem functions. In selecting a type of power distribution. we focus on keeping
power losses and mass at a minimum while attending to survivability, cost, reliability,
and power quality.
.
. .
Power switches are usually mechamcal relays because of then proven flight
history. reliability. and low power dissipation. Solid-state relays, based on power technology, which uses metaI-oxide semiconductor field-effect transistors are available.
The load profile of a spacecraft is a key determining factor in the design specifications of a power distribution subsystem. Predominant spacecraft loads (radar, communications, motors. computers) may require low- to high-voltage dc (5-270 Vdc),
high-voltage single-phase ac (115 Vrms, 60 Hz), or high-voltage three-phase ac
(120/440 Vrms, 400 Hz)-all converted from the 28-Vdc power bus. Because the ~g­
ulation requirements for these loads vary, the bus voltage may need further regulating,
leveling up or down, and, possibly. inverting through dc-dc converters. Spacecraft
power loads often tum on or off or otherwise vary their power consumption. Transient
behavior within a load may produce noise that the distribution system translates to
other loads. potentially harming working components. In addition, certain spacecraft
loads require a voltage different from the bus voltage. Power converters often connect
loads susceptJ'ble to noise or requiring voltage conversion to the distn'bution system.
These converters typically isolate the load from the noise on the bus and regulate the
power provided to the load against disturbances from the load and the bus. They also
keep load failures from damaging the power-distribution system and provide on~ff
control to desired loads. Any dc-dc converter connected to the bus must dampen Its
electromagnetic-interference filter to keep step loads from causing excessive ringing.
We need to know the boundaries of the load profile to evaluate its effects on
required bus voltage and frequency. Most spacecraft have demanded ~ow power
« 2,000 W), so power distribution has relied on a standard, 28 V bus. This standard,
with electronic parts built to match, has limited study of the best bus voltage. As power
systems expand to many kilowatts, the 28 V bus may not work for power distribution
because of losses in cabling and limits on mass. The harness or cabling that intercODnects the spacecraft's subsystems is a large part (10-25%) of the electrical-power
system's mass. We must keep harnesses as short as possible to reduce voltage drops
and to regulate the bus voltage. Figure 11-12 depicts the relationship between current
and cable mass.
Systems for distributing power on spacecraft have been predominantly dc because
spacecraft generate direct current power. Direct-current systems will dominated
throughout the 199Os. Conversion to ac would require more electronics, which would
add mass to. the BPS. Altemating-current power distribution applies only for highpower spacecraft, such as the International Space Station, which have many electrical
loads with varying duty cycles. Even on the space station, however. recent decisions
have taken planners back to de for the entire distribution system.
Power distn'bution systems are either centralized or decentralized, depending on the
location of the converters. The decentralized approach places the CQnverters at each

I

424

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.4

r-

i

0.8

Step

0.4

0.2

Consider

Possibilities

1. Determine the
electrical load
profile

• All spacecraft loads, their duty
cycles, and special operating
modes
• Inverters for ae requirements
• Transient behavior
within each load
• Load-failure Isolation

• Low-voltage dc: 5 V
• High-voltage de: 270 V
• High-voltage 1-phase ae:
115 Vrms, 60 Hz
• High-voltage, 3-phase ae:
120/440 Vrmso 400 Hz

2. Decide on
centralized or
decentralized
control

• Individual load
requirements
• Total system mass

• Converters at each loa~for a few
special loads
• Centralized converters control voltage
from the main bus (no specialized
power requirements)

3. Determine the
tauH protection
subsystem

• Detection (active or passive)
• Isolation
• Correction (change devices,
reset fuses, work around lost
subsystem)

• Cable size (length and diameter)
and excess eurrent-carrylng ability
• Size of power storage In case of
a short clrcuH
• Location of fuses and their type

~ 0.6
:!!.

!

425

TABLE 11-41. Steps In the Power Distribution Subsystem Design.

1.0

I!

Power

11.4

0.0 ~~==------L-___~~___-L._ _ _~
o
200
Current (Amps)
F1g.11-12.

Cable Mass vs. Current. We must account for the cable and hamess mass when
designing the Power Subsystem. Operating low current (less than 30 amps) devices
helps keep this mass low.

load separately, whereas the centralized approach regulates power to all spacecraft
loads within the main bus. The decentralized approach implies an unregulated bus
because distributed converters regulate power. A regulated power bus typically has
some power converters at the load interface because electronics may require different
voltages (+5, ±12 Vdc). An advantage of the centraIized system is that we do not have
to taiIor-design the EPS for different applications. Larger spacecraft with high power
levels use the decentralized distribution systems, with an unregulated bus, usually.
Fault protection within the BPS focuses on detection, isolation, and correction of
faults. Its main purpose is to isolate a failed load that could eventually cause loss of
the mission or the spacecraft. A failed load typically implies a short circuit, which will
draw excessive power. If this condition continues, the failed load may stress cables and
drain the energy-storage reserve. Typically, we would isolate these faults from the
BPS bus with fuses (sometimes resettable). Most spacecraft power loads have some
sort of fuse in series with the power bus to isolate faults. Of course, if the mission
requires us to know where load faults occur, we can add fault-detection circuits. To
design the Power Distribution subsystem, follow the steps in Table 11-41.
11.4.4 Power Regulation and Control

The energy source determines how we regulate a spacecraft's power. For example,
we regulate a static or dynamic power source through the direct energy transfer
method discussed below. But because most aerospace applications use solar photovol-

taics, we will examine power regulation emphasizing that viewpoint. P.ower regulation
divides into three main categories: controlling the solar array, regulating bus voltage,
and charging the battery.
We must control electrical power generated at the array to prevent battery overcharging and undesired spacecraft heating. The two main power control techniques,
illustrated in Fig. 11-13, are a peak-power tracker (PPT) and a direct-energy-transfer
(DEl) subsystem. A PPT is a nondissipative subsystem because it extracts ~e ex~ct
power a spacecraft requires up to the array's peak power. The DET subsystem IS a ~s­
sipative subsystem because it dissipates power not used by the loads. However; a DET
subsystem can dissipate this power at the array or through external banks of shunt
resistors to avoid internal power dissipation. DET s~bsystems commonly use sh.unt
regulation to maintain the bus voltage at a predetemuned level. Figure 11-13 depIcts
the main functional differences between varying PPT and shunt-regulated DET sub~~

.

A PPT is a dc-dc converter operating in series with the solar array. Thus, It
dynamically changes the operating point of the solar-array source to the voltage side
of the array (Fig. 11-13) and tracks the peak-power point w~en en~ demand
exceeds the peak power. It allows the array voltage to swmg up to Its maxunum power
point; then the converter transforms the input power to ~ ~uivale~t output power, but
at a different voltage and current. Solar-source ch~ctenstics penmt ~ to.extract.large
amounts of power when the array is cold (post ~lipse) ~d at the bepnnmg of life. A
peak-power tracker replaces the shunt-regulation fun;tton b~ bac~g off the peakpower point of the arrays toward the end of the battery s chargmg penod. Because the
PPf is in series with the array, it uses 4-7% of the total power. A PPT has advantages
for missions under 5 years that require more power at BOL than at EOL.
For direct energy transfer systems a shunt regulator operates in para11el to the array
and shunts the array current (typically at the array) away from the subsystem when the

,r

426

Spacecraft Subsystems

Peak PowerTracklng (PPT) Systems

11.4

Direct Energy Transfer (DEl) Systems

Unregulated
BusUsJng
PaJaOel Batteries

Unregulated
Bus Using
linear Charge
Current Control
Recharge Control

Quasi-Regulated
Bus with Constant
Current Chargers

Systems
Using a Fully
Regulated Bus

FIg. 11-13. Techniques for Power Regulation. The basic approaches are Peak Power Track.
Ing (PP7), which places a regulator In series with the solar arrays and the load, and
Direct Energy Transfer(DE1), which uses a regulator In parallal with the solar arrays
and load.

loads or battery ch~g do no! n~ po:-ver. Power subsystems with shunt regulation
are extremely effiCIent. They dissIpate little energy by simply shunting excess power
at the array or. through shunt resistor banks. A shunt-regulated subsystem has
advantag~: fewer parts, Jo~er mass, and higher total efficiency at EOL.
Techniqu~ for controlling bus voltage on electrical-power subsystems fall into
~ categones:. ~gulated, quasi-regulated, or fully regulated. Figure 11-13
illustrates the mam differences between these techniques. An unregulated subsystem
has a load bus voltage that varies significantly. The bus-voltage regulation derives
from battery regulation, which varies about 20% from charge to discharge. In an
unregulafed subsystem, the load bus voltage is the voltage of the batteries.
9uasl-regul~ed subsystems regulate the bus voltage during battery charge but not
dunng ba~ disc~ge. A battery charger is in series with each battery or group of
parallel batteries. During charge the bus voltage fixes at a potential several volts above
the batteries. As the batteries reach full charge, the drop across the chargers decreases,

427

Power

UA

but the bus voltage is still constantly regulated. The bus becomes unregulated during
discharge when the voltage is about a diode drop lower than the batteries and decreases
as the batteries further discharge. A quasi-regulated power subsystem has low efficiency and high electromagnetic interference if used with a peak-power tracker.
The fully regulated power subsystem is inefficient, but it will work on a spacecraft
that requires low power and a highly regulated bus. This subsystem employs charge
and discharge regulators. We can design the regulators so the charge regulator uses linear technology and the discharge regulator is a switching converter, but for best efficiency both should be converters. The advantage of this type of power subsystem is
that, when we connect it to the loads, the system behaves like a low-impedance power
supply, making design integration a simple task. But it is the most complex type of
power subsystem, with an inherent low efficiency and high electromagnetic
interference when used with a PPT or boost converter.
We can charge batteries individually or in parallel. A parallel charging system is
simpler and has the lower cost, but does not allow flexibility in vehicle integration. It
can also stress batteries so they degrade faster. When batteries are charged in parallel,
the voltage is the same but the current and temperature are not Because cUrrent is not
rigidly controlled, one battery could receive all the available charge current, and a
thermal runaway condition could result if we do not control the bus voltage from the
hottest battery. Parallel batteries eventually end up balancing out, so we could use
them for missions under five years. To ensure a battery life greater than five years, we
should seriously consider independent chargers, such as the linear, charge-currentcontrol (LC3 ) design in Fig. 11-13.
Batteries usually limit the life of a spacecraft. To support a seven-year life, we must
charge the batteries independently to degrade the battery as little as possible. Individual charging optimizes the battery use by charging all the batteries to their own unique
limits. It also forgives battery deviations in systems with several batteries. Unfortunately, individual chargers add impedance, electronic piece parts, and thermal
dissipation not present in a parallel system. To design the Power Regulation and
Control subsystem, follow the steps in Table 11-42.
TABLE 11-42. Steps In the Power Regulation and Control Subsystem Design.

Step

Consider

Possibilities

1. Determine the
power source

• All spacecraft loads, their duty
cycles, and special operating
modes

• Primary batteries
• Photovoltalc
• Static power
• DynamIc power

2. Design the
electrical control
subsystem

• Power source
• Battery charging
• Spacecraft heating

• Peak-power tracker
• Dlrect-energy transfer

3. Develop the
electrical bus
voltage control

• How much control does each
load require?
• Battery voltage variation from
charge to discharge
• Battery recharge subsystem
. • Battery cycle life
• Total system mass

• Unregulated
• Quasi-regulated
• Fully regulated
• Parallel or individual charging
- < 5 yrs-paraDei charge
- > 5 yrs-Independent charge

428

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.s

11.5 Thermal*
David G. Gilmore, Brian E. Hardt,
Robert C. Prager, The Aerospace Corporation
Eric W. Grob, Wes Ousley, Goddard Space Flight Center
The role of the thermal control subsystem (TCS) is to maintain all spacecraft and
p~yload components and subsystems within their required temperature limits for each
mission phase. Temperature limits include a cold temperature which the component
must not go below and a hot temperature that it must not exceed. Two limits are
frequently defined: operational limits that the component must remain within while
operating and survival limits that the component must remain within at all times, even
wh~n not powered. Exceeding survival temperature limits can result in permanent
~.Ipment damage as opposed to out-of-tolerance performance when operational
hmlts are ~xceeded. Table 11-43 gives typical component temperature ranges for
representative spacecraft components. Thermal control is also used to ensure that
temperature gradient requirements are met. An example of a gradient requirement is
to ensure that one side of a structure does not get hotter or colder than the opposite side
by more than, say, 30 dC. A larger gradient could cause structural deformation such
that pointing is adversely impacted. possibly permanently.
TABLE 11-43.

Examples of Typical Thermal Requirements for Spacecraft Components.
~e.thermaI control subsystem Is required to maintain all spacecraft equipment
withIn proper temperature ranges. Note that the temperature. extremes on the
outer portions of spacecraft can vary between ± 200 ·C.
Component

Batteries
Power Box Baseplates
Reaction Wheels
GyrosIJMUs
Star Trackers
C&DH Box Baseplates
Hydrazine Tanks and Unes
Antenna Gimbals
Antennas
Solar Panels

11.5

Thermal

429

control systems are designed to keep spacecraft at the cool end of allowable temperature ranges. Cooler components generally last longer, and this allows for system power
growth. Thoug~ this can require ad~tional power,. it d~eases the number of
expensive iteratiOns on the thermal design and analysIs (which happens anyway, of
course).
Thermal control is critical to ensuring the performance and survival of spacecraft
and payioad equipment. Consider your personal computer, for example. It typically
operates at room temperature plus or minus a few 10' s of degrees. The sp~ce en.vironment can cause equipment to get as hot as 100 o C and as cold as -130 C With the
changes occurring in lO's of seconds or minutes. Your cenpho~e works poorly, if ~t
works at all, after being kept in your black car during a hot summer afternoon. In thiS
example, the environment reaches approximately 60 0 to 65 DC.
Table 11-44 summarizes the design process for the thermal control system. As
always, we begin with the development of requirements and constraints, paying
particular attention to specific equipment or events likely to cause problems, such as
the need for maintaining cryogenic temperatures for a payload instrument or a long
thruster firing that may cause significant radiant heating on nearby surfaces. Step 2 is
to determine the overall thermal environment of the spacecraft, i.e., characterize the
heat inputs throughout the entire life of the mission. The most important external heat
source will nearly always be the Sun, which continuously provides 1367 W/m2 (called
the solar constant) at the mean distance of the Earth from the Sun and which varies as
l/r2 with distance from the Sun. (See Fig. 11-14.) This input goes away whenever the
spacecraft enters a period of eclipse as discussed in Sec. 5.1. However, the Earth or
other nearby central body serves as a moderating thermal influence by radiating heat
in the infrared, corresponding to the blackbody temperature of the central body. (See
Sec. 9.3.1.)

Typical Temperature Ranges (OC)
Operational

Survival

O·to 15
-10 to 50
-10 to 40
Oto4O
Ot03O
-20 to 60
15 to 40
-40 to 80
-100 to 100
-150 to 110

-10 to 25
-20 to 60
-20 to 50
-10 to 50
-10 to 40
-40 to 75
5t050
-50 to 90
-120 to 120
-200 to 130

Thermal control techniques are broadly divided into· two categories. Passive
thermal control makes use of materials, coatings, or surface finishes (such as blankets
or second surface mirrors) to maintain temperature limits. Active thermal control
wh~ch is generally more complex and expensive, maintains the temperature by som~
active means, such as heaters or thermo-electric coolers. In general, low-cost thermal

Rg.11-14. Satellite Thermal Environment The most significant external heat source is the
Sun but we must also include reflected solar energy (albedo) and Earth Infrared In

·This sec:tion has been rewritten in its entirety as of the 5th printing, September 2003. The help
an~ assIStance of Gwynne Gurevich of Space Exploration Technologies; Brian D'Souza of
Mi~m. Inc.; Ted Swanson, Ted Michalek, George Daelemans. and Dan Butler of Goddard
Space Flight Center in the preparation of the new section is greatly appreciated.

In Step 3, we review thermal requirements and constraints, compare them with
actual heat sources and equipment placement. and identify situations where the
maximum and minimum equilibrium temperatures of the equipment are outside the
required limits. For example, challenges arise when we must deal with cryogenic

our ~culations. The only way a spacecraft can get rid of heat Is by radiating It to
space.

~

I:

I

Spacecraft Subsystems

430

11.s

11.5

Thermal

431

'I .

I

,....

i

......;

~
,....

~~
Ill·
,....,....
,....,....

"i~
Ill.
,....,....
,....,....

It)

.q
,....
,....

co
.q
,....
,....

devices or when required temperature tolerances are very tight. Once we thoroughly
understand the thermal control challenges, we enter Step 4 of the process to develop
thermal designs that can be used to satisfy our requirements. These may range from
applying different paillts, multi-layer insulation blankets, and component placement.
to the use of more sophisticated devices like cryogenic cooling systems, heat pipes,
and thermostatically-controlled heaters.
Once we have identified a potential thermal control approach and configuration, we
proceed to Step 5 where we determine the radiator and heater requirements for the
spacecraft and its components. We consider two worst-case conditions: worst-case
hot, where the spacecraft is in the Sun and maximum power is being dissipated, and
worst-case cold, where the spacecraft is in eclipse and dissipating minimum power.
During this step we also try to understand the performance of the thermal control
system over time taking into account degradation of thermal control surfaces and
extraordinary thermal events or circumstances.
In Step 6 we use the information generated previously to estimate the mass and
power of the thermal control system. As usual we document the results (in Step 7) and
repeat the entire process until we create a thermal control system that meets the requirements and constraints at an acceptable mass, cost. and risk.
Each of the steps in this process is discussed in more detail below. For a much more
extensive discussion of the thermal control process for space systems see Gilmore
[2002] or Karam [1998].

11.5.1 Spacecraft Thermal Environment
Spacecraft thermal control is a process of energy management in which the thermal
environment plays a major role. Over the course of the development and operational
life cycle, a spacecraft will be exposed to environments encountered during ground
testing, transportation, launch, orbit transfer, and operational orbits with nominal and
safehold attitudes. During ground operations, convection with ambient air and radiant
heat exchange with surrounding objects are the principal environmental influences.
During launch ascent, radiant heating from the inside surfaces of the booster fairing
and, after the fairing is jettisoned, free-molecular heating due to friction with the
atmosphere are the dominant environmental drivers. Once above the upper reaches of
the atmosphere, direct sunlight. sunlight reflected off of Earth or other planets
(albedo), and infrared (IR) energy emitted from a planet's atmosphere or surface are
the only significant sources of environmental heat. In most cases, the thermal control
system is designed to maintain all spacecraft components within allowable temperature limits in the environments encountered on-orbit. while compatibility with ground
operations and launch ascent conditions is assured by controlling the environment or
limiting the spacecraft's exposure to it.
As illustrated in Fig. 11-15, the overall thermal control of a spacecraft on orbit is
usually achieved by balancing the heat emitted by the spacecraft as IR radiation
against the heat dissipated by its internal components plus the heat absorbed from the
environment; atmospheric convection is absent in space. Because a generic thermal
control system capable of maintaining spacecraft temperatures in all environments
would be prohibitively heavy and expensive, it is generally more cost effective and
practical to custom-tailor a thermal design to each spacecraft and its mission environment. This means that the thermal design analysis must consider the worst case hot and
cold combinations of waste heat generated by spacecraft components in their various
operating modes and the variable environmental heat loads on the spacecraft.

432

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.s

Direct Solar
i

j
,I

i

Sunlight is the major source of environmental heating on most spacecraft. Fortunately, the Sun is a very stable energy source which is constant to within a fraction of
a percent. However, because the Earth's orbit is elliptical, the intensity of sunlight
reaching Earth varies approximately ± 3.5%, depending on Earth's distance from the
Sun. At summer solstice, Earth is farthest from the Sun, and the intensity is at a minimum value of 1322 W/m2; at winter solstice, the intensity is at its maximum value of
1414 W/m 2• The intensity of sunlight at Earth's mean distance from the Sun (1 AU) is
known as the solar constant and is equal to 1367 W/m 2•
Solar intensity also varies as a function of wavelength, as shown in Fig. 11-15. The
energy distribution is approximately 7% ultraviolet, 46% visible, .and 47% near
(short-wavelength) IR. However, the IR energy emitted by the Sun is of a much shorter
wavelength than that emitted by a body near room temperature. This distinction allows
for the selection of thennal-control finishes that are very reflective in the solar spectrum but highly emissive to room temperature (long-wavelength) IR, as shown in
Fig. 11-15. These finishes, which will be discussed in more detail later, minimize solar
heat loads while maximizing a spacecraft's ability to reject waste heat.
Quartz mirror radiator
absorptance or ""-,
emittance ~
,

body spectrum
, ~ vertical scale)

I

\

(no vertical scale):

,

Solar spectrum

I~

Room temperature

I

1/

I

I
I
I

II}
10
Wavelength (jun)

20

Rg. 11-15. Solar and Room Temperature Body Spectral Distribution. The solid lines identify
the wavelength of peak emisSion for solar energy and a body at room temperature,
but do not represent magnitude (no vertical scale). Note that solar energy
wavelength Is much shorter than that of a body at .room temperature. The dashed
line represents the absorptance or emittance of a quartz mirror radiator. The point Is
that we can select thermal control coatings that are highly reflective to high energy
Inputs like solar energy and highly emissive at room temperatures.

Albedo
Sunlight reflected off a planet or moon is known as albedo. A planet's albedo is
usually expressed as the fraction of incident sunlight that is reflected back to space and
is highly variable. Usually, reflectivity is greater over land as compared with oceans
and generally increases with decreasing local solar-elevation angles and increasing
cloud coverage. Because of greater snow and' ice coverage, decreasing solar elevation
angle, and increasing cloud coverage, albedo also tends to increase with latitude.
These variations make selection of the best albedo value for a particular thermal
analysis rather uncertain, and it is not unusual to find variations throughout the
industry. Representative values for orbits of different inclinations are shown in
Table 11-45A.

Thermal

11.5

433

TABLE 11-45A. Typical Orbit-Average Earth IR and Albedo Values for Varfous Orbits
(Data Courtesy NASA). This table shows the relative nature of Earth-emitted
IR and percent Albedo as a function of orbit Inclination. Note that the highest
values of Earth-emitted IR occur at lower inclinations associated with tropical
and desert regions. The value of Earth-emltted IR decreases with increasing
latitude. In general, albedo Increases with increasing latitude.
Orbft
Inclination
(deg) .
0-30

30-60
60-90

Angle of
Sun Out of
Orbit Plane
(deg)
0
90
0
90
0
90

Emitted Radiation
(W/m2)
Min
228
228
218
218
218
218

Max
275
275
257
257
244
244

Albedo
(percent)
Min
18
45

23
50
23
50

Max
28
55
30
57
30

57

EarthIR
All incident sunlight not reflected as albedo is absorbed by Earth and eventually
re-emitted as m energy or blackbody radiation (see Sec. 9.2). While this balance is
maintained fairly well on a global annual average basis, the intensity of IR energy
emitted at any given time from a particular point on Earth can vary considerably depending on factors such as the local temperature of Earth's surface and the amount of
cloud cover. A warmer surface region will emit more radiation than a colder one.
Generally, highest values of Earth emitted IR will occur in tropical and desert regions
(as these are the regions of the globe receiving the maximum solar heating) and will
decrease with increasing latitude. Cloud cov.er tends to lower Earth emitted m because
cloud tops are cold and clouds effectively block up-welling radiation from the Earth's
wanner surface below. These localized variations in Earth emitted m, while significant, are much less severe than the variations in albedo. Representative orbit-average
values for Earth IR are shown in Table 11-45A.
energy emitted by the Earth, which has an effective average temperature
The
around -18°C, is of approximately the same wavelength as that emitted by spacecraft;
that is, it is of much longer wavelength than the energy emitted by the Sun at 5500 DC.
Unlike short-wavelength solar energy, Earth IR loads incident on a spacecraft cannot
be reflected away from radiator surfaces with special thennal-control coatings, since
the same coatings would prevent the radiation of waste heat away from the spacecraft.
Because of this, Earth-emitted IR energy can present a particularly heavy backload on
spacecraft radiators in low-altitude orbits.
Usually the spacecraft is warmer than the effective Earth temperature, and the net
heat transfer is from spacecraft to Earth. However, for analysis, it is convenient to
ignore Earth when calculating radiant heat rejection from the spacecraft to space and
to assume that Earth does not block the view to space. Then the difference in IR energy
is added back in as an "incoming" heat rate called Earth-emitted lR.
Another significant fonn of environmental heating is known as free molecular
heating (FMH). This is a result of bombardment of the vehicle by individual molecules
in the outer reaches of the atmosphere. For most spacecraft, FMH is only encountered
during launch ascent just after the booster's payload fairing is ejected. It is desirable
to drop the fairing as soon as possible after launch to minimize the amount of d~d
weight the booster must deliver to orbit. The point at which the fairing is separated IS

m

434

Spacecr3ft Subsystems

11.s

often determined by a trade-off between the desire to save weight and the need to
protect the spacecraft from excessive atmospheric heating. Some spacecraft also
experience FMH if they have exceptionally low perigee altitudes or use aerobraking
maneuvers that cause them to dip into a planet's atmosphere. In most cases, FMH
effects can be tolerated by the on-orbit thermal design so that no special thermal design
changes are required to protect the spacecraft from it.
Environment of Interplanetary Missions

i

i

Interplanetary trajectories can expose spacecraft to a range of thermal
environments much more severe than those encountered in Earth orbit. During most
of an interplanetary cruise, the only environmental heating comes from direct sunlight,
which falls off as the square of the distance from the Sun. During a flyby, or after a
spacecraft is placed into orbit around a planet, it is also exposed to IR and albedo loads
from the planet.
Planetary and lunar IR and albedo environments are given in Table 11-45B. They
vary widely due to the various planet's different distances from the Sun and different
atmosphere and surface characteristics. Gilmore [2002] provides a detailed characterization of the thermal environments of the planets.

11.5

Thermal

435

thermal properties. The problems of in-space stability, outgassing, and mechanical
adhesion to the substrate have been resolved for most coatings. There are many fully
qualified coatings, so development and qualification of a new coating for a new design
is normally unnecessary.
.
The external surfaces of a spacecraft radiatively couple the spacecraft to space.
Because these surfaces are also exposed to external sources of energy such as sunlight
and Earth-emitted IR, their radiative properties must be selected to achieve an energy
balance at the desired temperature between spacecraft internal dissipation, external
sources of heat, and reradiation to space, as illustrated in Fig. 11-16.

finish determines a, E

EnvIronmental heat loads (0extemaJ)
.# A a (solar + albedo)

~

Ae(JR)

TABLE 11-45B. Albedo and IR Emission of the Planets. This table shows representative
values of albedo and IR emission for the planets of our Solar System. PeriheDon
and aphelion represent the points In the orbits of Mercury and Mars where they
are closest and furthest from the Sun.
Planet or Moon

Visible Surface

Geometric Albedo

Solid

0.12

Orbit-Average IR (W/m2)
4150 (perihelion)
1810 (apheDon)
Venus
Clouds
0.80
153
Earth
Solid/Clouds
0.37'
231
Moon
Solid
0.07
430
Mars
Solid
0.29
162 (perihelion)
120 (aphelion)
Jupiter
Clouds
0.34
13.5
Satum
0.34
4.6
Clouds
Uranus
Clouds
0.34
0.63
Neptune
Clouds
0.28
0.52
Pluto
0.47
Solid
0.5
Use 0.27 Hthe Sun Is In the orbit plane. This Is were albedo heal loads are the most significant
Mercury

.

11.5.2 Thermal Control Components
Srnface Finishes
In spacecraft thermal designs, wavelength-dependent thermal control coatings are
used for various purposes. Solar reflectors such as second-surface mirrors and white
paints or silver- or aluminum-backed teflon are used to minimize absorbed solar
energy, yet emit energy almost like an ideal blackbody. To minimize both the absorbed
solar energy and infrared emission, polished metal such as aluminum foil or gold plating is used. On the interior of the vehicle, if it is desired to exchange energy with the
compartment or other equipment, black paint is commonly used. Thus, the existing
state of the art uses a rather wide variety of coatings which have wavelength dependent

=

Environmental loads +:E~ Reradiated energy
(Steady stete)

Rg.11-16, Radiator Energy Balance (no external blockage). Note that we must.select
radiative properties of the spacecraft surface to achieve an energy bal!mce among
spacecraft Internal dissipation, external heat sources and reradiation to space to
obteln the desired temperature.

The two primary surface properties of importance are the IR emissivity, Eo and the
solar absorptivity, a. Table 11-46 shows the range of"properties available for some
common surface finishes. Two or more coatings are sometimes combined in a
checkerboard or striped pattern to obtain the desired combination of average absorptivity and emissivity if it can not be obtained in a single material.
As an example, the average temperature of a sphere at 1 AU from the Sun can be
calculated'as follows:

cr T4= (ale) x S x (ApIA)
X 1(r8 Wfm2 K4,~

(11-10)

where cr is the Stefan Boltzmann's constant, 5.670 51
is the pr0jected area. A is the total area, and S = 1367 W/m2 (the solar constant). For a sphere,
YA=nr2/4nr2 =0.25. If the sphere is painted withZ93 white, ale= 0.17/0.92 and
T = -90°C. For a sphere painted with Z306 black, a Ie = 0.921 0.89 and T = 8 DC.
Thermal control finishes are affected in orbit by charged particles. ultraviolet
radiation, high vacuum, and the contaminant films that deposit out on almost all spacecraft surfaces. The general result of these processes is an increase in solar absorptivity
with little or no effect on infrared emissivity. ~s is normally undesirable from a

436

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.s

TABLE 11-46. Properties of Common FInishes. The absorptivity and emissivity of typical
spacecraft finishes are shown here. Note that a combination of finishes can be
made to create the desired absorptivity to emissivity ratios.
Surface FInish
Optical Solar Reflectors
8 mil Quartz Mirrors
2 mH Slivered Teflon
5 mil Silvered Teflon
2 mH Aluminized Teflon
5 mil Aluminized Teflon

a (Beginning of LHe)

Il

0.05 to 0.08
0.05 to 0.09
0.05 to 0.09
0.10toO.16
0.10toO.16

0.80
0.66
0.78
0.66
0.78

White Paints
S13G-LO
Z93
ZOT
Chemglaze A276

0.20 to 0.25
0.17 to 0.20
0.18 to 0.20
0.22 to 0.28

0.85
0.92
0.91
0.88

Black Paints
Chemglaze Z306
3M Black Velvet

0.92 to 0.98
-0.97

0.89
0.84

0.34
0.38
0.41
0.46

0.55
0.67
0.75
0.86

0.08 to 0.17
0.09 to 0.17
0.19 to 0.30
0.25 to 0.86*

0.04
0.03 to 0.10
0.03
0.04 to 0.88"

(Material degrades In sunlight)
0.32
-0.22
0.9

0.34
0.66
0.80
0.1

Aluminized Kapton
112 mil
1 mil
2 mil
5 mil
Metallic
Vapor Deposited Aluminum (VDA)
Bare Aluminum
Vaporized Deposited Gold
Anodized Aluminum
Miscellaneous
1/4 mil Aluminized Mylar, Mylar Side
Beta Cloth
Astra Quartz
MAXORB

Thermal

U.5

437

cut-outs provided for radiator areas to reject internally generated waste heat. MLI
blankets are also typically used to protect internal propellant tanks, propellant lines,
solid rocket motors, and cryogenic dewars. Single-layer radiation barriers are sometimes used in place ofMLI where a lesser degree 01 thermal isolation is required, since
they are lighter and cheaper to manufacture. For applications requiring insulation
under atmospheric conditions, foam, batt, and aerogel materials are generally used
because MLl is not very effective in the presence of a gas.
Multilayer insulation is composed of multiple layers of low-emittance films with
low conductivity between layers, as shown in Fig. 11-17A. The simplest construction
is a layered blanket assembled from embossed, thin mylar sheets (114 mil thick) with
a vacuum-deposited aluminum finish on one side of each sheet. The embossing results
in the sheets touching only at a few points, thereby minimizing conductive heat paths
between layers. The layers are aluminized on one side only, so that the mylar can act
as a low-conductivity spacer. Higher-performance construction uses mylar film
metallized on both surfaces (aluminum or gold) with silk or dacron net, Tissuglas
paper, or "Super-Flock" whiskers as the low-conductance spacers. Testing doneatJPL
showed that replacing the flat aluminized mylar/dacron spacers with embossed
aluminized Kapton and no spacers decreased the effectiveness of the blankets tested
by 19% [Lin, Stultz, Reeve, 1995].
Outer

Ugh~~~!~~~Ii~~~~;;~~~~~~~~
·
·

Metallzed
Netting spacer •

15 to 20 reflectorl
spacer layers, total
(If necessary)
:
Metallzed
Netting spacer
Inner cover
Structure

Note: DetaIls and features are shown for mustr&tIon

and wID vary with actual design and installation.

" Anodizing and similar surface treatments must be carefully controlled in order to produce repeatable
optical properties.
.

thermal control standpoint because spacecraft radiators must be sized to account for
the substantial increase in absorbed solar energy that occurs due to degradation over
the mission. These radiators, which are oversized to handle the high solar loads at
"end-of-Iife," cause the spacecraft to run much cooler in the early years of the mission,
sometimes necessitating the use of heaters to avoid under-temperatures of electronic
components. The degradation is, therefore, a problem not only because of the solar
load, but also because of the change in load over the course of the mission. The stability of coating properties is important in order to both limit maximum temperatures and
minimize heater-power requirements.

Insulation
Multilayer insulation (MLI) and single-layer radiation shields are among the most
common thermal control elements on spacecraft. MLI blankets are used either to
prevent excessive heat loss from a component or excessive heating from environmental fluxes or rocket plumes. Most spacecraft are covered with MLI blankets, with

FIg. 11-17A. Composition of a Typical MU Blanket. Multilayer insulation blankets are made
of fairly sophisticated layers of low-emittance mms with low conductivity between
layers. (Courtesy NASA)

Figure 11- i 7B illustrates theoretical and experimental data for embossed alumi-

nized (one surface) mylar insulation versus number of insulation-blanket layers. The
emittance for a multilayer blanket theoretically varies inversely with one over one plus
the number of layers. However, in practice, simply increasing the number of layers
past a certain value will not improve performance. As the number of layers increases,
radiative heat transfer becomes small compared to conductive "shorts" between layers
and other losses. Thus, a point of diminishing returns is reached. Considering these
trends, about 25 layers are usually sufficient to obtain a minimum overall conductance
value.
In well-controlled laboratory tests, it is possible to achieve values of 0.005 or lower
for the effective emittance, e*. However, when a blanket is configured for spacecraft
applicati~n, experience has shown that an e* of 0.015 to 0.030 is typical for mediumsized area applications. As the size of the application increases, the relative performance generally increases. This results from the smaller relative influences of heat

Spacecraft Subsystems

438

11.s

\.ifOAO Installed
•••••
0.01

,{OAO Installed
Installed
blanket tests
Inc! supports
•••• Vents and seams

'.g,

LM

~LM
8

I

o '.

E .005

0

l:LM ~

CD

i

0

~

e

0

0

tests bare
blanket

.001

Q

.0005

0

40
60
80
Number of aiuminlzed Mylar layers

20

439

Radiators
Most spacecraft waste heat is rejected to space by radiators. These occur in several
different forms, such as spacecraft structural panels, flat-plate radiators mounted to the
side of the spacecraft, or panels that are deployed after the spacecraft is on orbit.
Whatever the configuration, all radiators reject heat by IR radiation from their
surfaces. The radiating power is dependent on the emissivity. of the surface and its
temperature. The radiator must reject both the satellite waste heat plus any radiant-heat
loads from the environment or other spacecraft surfaces that are absorbed by the radiator, as shown in Fig. 11-16. Most radiators are therefore given surface fInishes with
high IR emissivity (> 0.8) to maximize heat rejection and low solar absorptivity « 0.2)
to limit heat loads from the Sun. Typical finishes include quaitz mirrors, silvered or
aluminized teflon, and white paint.
The radiating power of a radiator is a strong function of temperature. The total heat
leaving a radiator surface is given by the Stefan-Boltzmann equation: (See Sec. 9_2.)

0.05

o

Thermal

11.5

100

va. Number of Aluminized Layers. ThIs figure mustrates
theoretical and experimental data fOr embossed aiumlnized (one surface) mylar
Insulation versus number of insulation-blanket layers. Note that the emittance for a
multilayer blanket theoretically varies Inversaiy with one over one plus tha number
of layers.

Rg.11-17B. Effective Emittance

leaks due to edge effects, seams, or cable penetrations. For very~large-area applications with minimal penetrations, the e* laboratory performance approaches 0.005 at
30 layers. Performance data from cryogenic tankage and controlled calorimeter tests
typically show performance of e* down to 0.002. Control of discontinuities through
the design and fabrication of insulation joints and penetration is crucial to the problem
of reducing the effective emittance of multilayer blankets. Small area blankets show
high effective emittance along with considerable manufacturing variation. Very small
blankets used to wrap propellant lines typically have effective emittances ranging
from 0.05 to 0.30, making low emittance surface finishes a simpler and equally effective alternative for internal propellant lines. External lines that are exposed to sunlight
may still require MLI blankets, however, to avoid overheating that might be caused by
the high absorptancelemittance ratios typical of low emittance surface· finishes.
Missions involving planetary landers, rovers, or atmospheric probes usually require
insulation that performs well in the presence of an atmosphere. While MLI may still
be required to protect the hardware during interplanetary cruise, foam, batt, or aerogel
materials are generally added to provide insulation after atmospheric entry and landing
in situations where ambient pressure is expected to be high enough to substantially
degrade MLI performance. If atmospheric pressure and gravity are low .enough,
simple trapped gas spaces alone IDllY be sufficient to limit heat loss to the surroundings. The underlying principle behind aU of these insulation types is to trap gas within
volumes small enough to eliminate convection effects: Total heat transfer is thereby
limited to what can conduct through the low conductivity insulation material and gas
and radiate across the insulation through a process of multiple absorptions and
emissions within the insulation material structure. To complicate MLI design further
each layer must be grounded to reduce the chance of electrostatic discharge.

= e CT AT4

(11-11)

where A is the surface area, eis emissivity, Tis the absolute temperature, and CT is the
Stefan-Boltzmann constant (5.670 51 x lo-B W/m2 K4).
The T 4 term results in a large increase in radiating capability with temperature, as
shown in Fig. 11-18. The radiating power at 50°C is about twice that at 0 °C. At cryogenic temperatures the effect is even more pronounced, with a 70 OK" radiator having
only 1I300th the heat rejection capability of a room-temperature radiator. This makes
cryogenic radiators extremely sensitive to environmental heating and heat leaks
through insulation and supports, and leads to special design considerations.
1~r------.-------.------.-------~

f

1000

lBOO

1

BOO
400

m~

::t:

Rg.11-18. Blackbody Radiator Heat ReJection. Heat rejection or heat radiating capabOity
Increases with temperature. For example, the radiating capability at 50 ·C Is about

twice that of a surface at 0 ·C.

·The metric unit of temperature is the Kelvin, K, which is measured in the same units as the
Celsius scale, ·C, but starts at absolute zero. By definition, O"C = 273;15 K. In correct metric
usage, the word "degree" is used with the Celsius scale, but not with the Kelvin scale. For
example, "0 degrees Celsius equals 273.15 Kelvin" is correct, while "0 degrees Celsius equals
273.15 degrees Kelvin" is incorrect. Unfortunately, K is widely used in astronautics both for
1024 in computer systems analysis and for $1000 in cost analysis. (Of course, k is the metric
prefix for 1000.) To avoid confusion, we use "K and"C throughout However, many of the
references correctly omit the ..,.. symbol when using the Kelvin scale.

Spacecraft Subsystems

440

11.s

Most spacecraft radiators reject between 100 and 350 watts of spacecraft internally
generated electronics waste heat per square meter. The upper end of this range is
typical of a radiator that runs at a fairly high temperature (say 40 DC) and experiences
relatively modest heat backload from the environment or other spacecraft surfaces.
. The lower end of the range represents a radiator running below room temperature in
low-Earth orbit, where environmental backloads can be substantial. The actual sizing
is determined by a thermal analysis that considers the desired operating temperature,
worst-case satellite waste heat, environmental heating, and radiative and conductive
interactions with other spacecraft surfaces. Weights allocated for radiators typically
vary from almost nothing, if an existing structural panel is used as a radiator, to around
12 kglm2 for a heavy deployable radiator and its support and deployment structure.

Heaters
Ideally, thermal control of a satellite or component would be achieved using only
passive techniques, such as surface finishes. Unfortunately, orbital and seasonal variations in environment and component heat-generation rates, along with degradations
of surface finishes over time, can drive temperature variations in a passive design to
ranges larger than some components can withstand. Because of this, heaters are
sometimes required to protect components from cold-case environmental conditions
or to make up for heat that is not dissipated when an electronic box is turned off.
Heaters may also be used with thermostats or solid-state controllers to provide
precise temperature control of a particular component A third common use for heaters
is to warm components to their minimum operating temperatures before they are
turned on.
The most common type of heater used on spacecraft is the patch heater, several of
which are shown in Fig. 11-19A. It consists of an electrical resistance element
sandwiched between two sheets of flexible electrically insulating material,such as
Kapton. The patch may have one circuit, or more than one, depending on whether
redundancy is required within the patch. Redundancy is generally required on spacecraft systems since heater circuits can fail. Sometimes the redundancy is provided
within the patch and sometimes it is provided by using two separate patches. The patch
heaters shown in the figure illustrate the custom shapes to which these heaters may be
made. In most instances, however, a simple rectangular patch of some standard dimension is used.

Thermal

U.5

441

. shown in Fig. 11-19B and consists of a wound resistor enclosed in a cylindrical
:etallic case. A hole is typically drilled in the compo~ent ~o be heated and the
artridge potted into the hole. Another attachment technIque mv.olves the use of a
~lamp or small bracket to hold the heater. These heaters are typically a quarter inch
diameter or less and up to a few inches long.
Almost all heater systems have some sort of switch or control. This typically
involves a relay .that is commandable from the ground to enable or disable power to
the heater, a fuse to protect the spacecraft from a short circuit, and, most commo~y, a
thermostat or solid-state controller to turn the heater on and off at predetermined
temperatures. More sophisticated satellites sometimes use their on-board computer to
monitor temperatures and turn heaters on and off as appropriate using relays.
The sinJplest arrangement involves only the heater, a fuse, and a ground commandable relay to turn the heater on and off. This arrangement is typically used for
heaters that are activated only for special events, or for heaters that can be left on all
the time. A typical application is heating up the catalyst beds on hydrazine thrusters to
100 DC before the thruster is fired. (Firing the thruster with a low initial catalyst-bed
temperature decreases the catalyst life.) The heater is commanded on, the catalyst-bed
is heated, the thruster is fired, and the heater is turned off until the next maneuver, all
under ground control.

(A) Elmwood Thermostat

(8) TAYCO Solid-State Controller

FIg. 11-20. Common Control Devices. MechanIcal thermostats are typ!caUy used to control the
operation of heaters on a spacecraft. Mechanical thermostats are faIr!y reliable but
tYP!caIly we have a large number of them on a spacecraft (up to several hundred on
some spacecraft) consequently we see occasional on-orbit faDures. Because of this
and increasIng spacecraft life requirements, soUd state controUers are becoming
more common.
Historically, the most common control device is a mechanical thermostat, such as

the one shown in Fig. 11-20A. These typically consist of a small hermetically sealed
(A) Patch Heaters

(8) Cartridge Heater

FIg. 11-19. Types 01 Heaters. Patch and cartridge heaters Bre used on many spacecraft to meet
the heating needs of different types of equipment These heaters are very Important
to the successful operation of key components, so we often· use redundancy to
Increase rellabDIty of these devices.
A cartridge heater is another type that is often used to heat blocks of material or
high-temperature components such as hydrazine-thruster catalyst beds. Such a heater

can containing a switch driven by a snap-action bimetallic actuator. The temperature
at which the thermostat clicks on, known as its set point, is fixed for any given
thermostat The engineer can select from an array of standard thermostats available
from the manufacturer to get a set point close to what is desired, or a custom device
can be ordered. In addition to the set point, the dead band, or the difference between
the temperatures at which the thermostat turns on and turns off, is important A smaller
dead band reduces the temperature swing of the device being heated and reduces
power consumption a little (since the average temperature is lower). On the other hand,
the smaller dead band also increases the number of cycles on the thermostat itself and

442

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.s

decieases its reliability. In any event, dead bands less than 4 °C are not recommended
due to problems that have occurred in the past Small dead bands have been known to
increase the chance of "dithering," in which the thermostat rapidly cycles on and off.
This is a failure condition that can cause the set point to drift lower, resulting in an
undertemperature of the component being controlled.
Even though thermostats are fairly reliable, the large number of them that may be
present on a typical spacecraft (up to several hundred) results in occasional on-orbit
failures. Because of this, and increasing spacecraft life requirements, solid-state
controllers are becoming more common. Such a controller, an example of which is
shown in Fig. 11-20B, replaces the mechanical switch with an electronic device that
has a higher reliability and life expectancy. TheSe are used extensively on the DMSP,
the Space Telescope, and the ISS. They employ a temperature sensor that can be
located either at the controller or at a remote location, as desired. Another advantage
of solid-state controllers is that extremely tight dead bands « 0.1 0c) are possible for
very precise temperature control, such as required on the Space Telescope. Optical
systems, some sensors, and electronic frequency standards often require precise
temperature control, which cannot be achieved with a mechanical thermostat.
A number of military and scientific satellites have started to use on-board computers to control heaters. Such systems read the temperatures from telemetry sensors
placed throughout the vehicle and send signals to turn relay-controlled heaters on and
off as required. This allows enormous flexibility since the control set points and dead
bands can be adjusted on orbit by uplinking new tables to the spacecraft computer.

Louvers
Louvers are active thermal.control elements that have been used in different forms
on numerous spacecraft. While most commonly placed over external radiators,louvers
may also be used to modulate radiant heat transfer between internal spacecraft
surfaces, or from internal surfaces directly to space through openings in the spacecraft
wall. In general, a louver in its fully open state allows the rejection of six times as
much heat as it does in the fully closed state, with no power required to operate it. Thus
louvers find application where internal power dissipation varies widely as a result of
equipment duty cycles.

443

The most commonly used louver assembly is the ''venetian-blind'' type shown in
Fig. 11-21. These louvers consist of four main elements: blades, actuators, sensing
elements, and structural elements. The louver is placed over a high emittance, low
absorptance spacecraft radiator to modulate the flow of radiant heat from that surface.
Blades, which are driven by the actuators. are the louver elements that give variableradiation characteristics to the radiator surface below. While closed, louvers shield the
radiator'S view to space, but while open. they allow radiative coupling to space. The
radiating characteristics of the radiator can be varied over the range defined by these
two extreme positions
The actuators drive the blades according to the perceived radiator temperature. In
most louver designs, a bimetallic spiral spring drives each louver blade independently
to ensure maximum reliability. Thus a single point failure is associated with one blade,
not the entire assembly. The actuator spring drives the blade angle as determined by
the underlying radiator temperature. A strong conductive path between the actuator and radiator is therefore sought to minimize the temperature gradient between
them.
Louver assemblies have been designed for operation in both shadow and sunlight.
Two design approaches that have been followed for operation in sunlight are the use
of a Sun shield to prevent direct solar illumination of the louver or the modification
of the louver assembly for high temperature operation if it is directly exposed to
sunlight. Characteristics of louvers offered by the principal vendors are shown in
Table 11-47A.
TABLE 11-47A. CharacterlsUcs of Flight-Quallfled Rectangular-Blade Louver Assemblles.a Here you can find typical characteristics for three louver assemblies that
can be used to estimate mass and size.
Orbital Sciences Corp.

SWales

Starsys

3to42

Various

1 to 16

Open Set
Points (DC)

VariousO

Oto40

-20 to 50

Open/Close
Differential (OC)

100r 18

10 or 18

14

Dbnensions (em)
Length
Width
Helgth

20 to 110
36 to 61

27 to 80
30 to 60
6.4

81043
22 to 40
6.4

Area (m2)

0.07 to 0.6

0.08 to 0.5

0.02 to 0.2

Weight/Area (kg!m2)b

3.2 to 5.4

-4.5

5.2 to 11.6

XTE, Stardust

Rosetta, Qulckblrd,
JPLc: MarIner, VikIng,
Voyager, GalUeo, MlS,
Magellan, TOPEX,
NSCAT, Casslnl,
Seawlnds

Blades

Right History

FIg. 11-21. Fairchild and Northrop Louver Assembly Schematic. The most commonly used
louvers are the "venetian-blind" type that are typically opened to allow heat to radiate
away from the spacecraft and closed to keep heat from escaping.

Thermal

U.5

Nimbus, landsat,OAO,
AT8-S, VIkIng, GPS,
SolarMax, AMPTE,
SPARTAN, Hubble,
Magellan, GRO, UARS,
EWE, TOPEX, GOES,
MGS,MSP

• Thls table contains representative values from past louver designs. Contact manufacturer for additional
design posslbUltles or values for specific designs.
b Weight without sunshleld.
C The Slarsys design Is a.slIghtly modified version of a JPL louver design that has flown on tha IndlcaIed
spacecraft

444

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.s

The effective emittance for some representative louvered-radiator designs are
shown in Table 11-47B. Note that the emittance range for the MMS Landsat-4 design
that uses a sunshield is considerably less than the other designs that do not have
sunshields. The apparent emissivity adv~ge of the unshielded designs, however, is
at least partly counteracted by the fact that' the unshielded louvers will trap sunlight
between the open blades, which adds an additional heat load that must be rejected. The
choice of a shielded or unshielded design for any particular radiator will depend on the
results of the analyses that show the relative performance of each option given the
solar illumination profile for that particular radiator.
TABLE 11-418. Louvers Effective EmlssMty Variations with Temperature (test data).
IVS-S Z·306 radlalol

~ E[~:~:~~:] E
. '~ ···
:

16 1820 22 24 26 28 30 32 34

:

Irl!elsat CRL AgTeflon
radiator

E
~

i!

1
,.

,i

,
•

MMS Landsat4 Z·306 radiator
AJumlnumlAgTeflon sunshleld

~[.:~:~~~.: ~ g~: ;:::~M~~

m

0.0

I

1416 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34

]

0.0 L.....J--L.....J.....L.....l-..I-.L-.L.....J
8 1012 14 16 18 20 32 34 36
5 10 1520 15 30 35 40 45 50
Temperature (DC)

Heat Pipes
A heat pipe uses a closed two-phase fluid-flow cycle to transport large quantities
of heat from one location to another without the use of electrical power. The heat pipe
can be used to create isothermal surfaces or to spread out heat from a localized source
uniformly over a larger area. One-way (diode) heat pipes have been tested and flown.
as have variable-conductance heat pipes, which maintain a constant temperature
under varying heat load conditions. Since the driving mechanism is capillary pumping.
a relatively weak force, traditional heat pipes may be susceptible to severe performance degradation when operating under gravity or acceleration. so planning is
needed to facilitate ground testing. Loop heat pipes and capillary pumped loops are
more advanced cousins of the basic heat pipes that can provide constant temperature
operation with varying heat loads under gravity or acceleration.
To illustrate how a heat pipe works, consider a simple horizontal heat pipe in
equilibrium with an isothermal environment, as shown in Fig. 11-22A. The liquid in
the wick and the vapor in the vapor space are at saturation. If heat is applied to the
evaporator, raising its temperature, liquid in the wick evaporates (removing some of
the added heat), which depresses the meniscus in the evaporator since less liquid is
present there. This process also raises the local vapor pressure, since it must be in
saturation with the heated liquid in the wick.
The difference between the increased curvature of the meniscus in the evaporator
wick and the unchanged meniscus in the condenser wick causes a difference in capil-

Thermal

11.5
Evaporator

445

Transportation section

Condenser

Fig. 11-22A. Heat Pipe SchemaUc. Heat pipes are very efficient in moving heat from one-place
to another on the spacecraft. See text for a description of operation.

lary pressure sufficient to pull liquid from the condenser wick toward the evaporator.
This replenishes the liquid in the evaporator wick. At the same time, heated vapor
flows from the evaporator to the condenser; which is at a lower pressure. When this
vapor comes in contact with cooler condenser surfaces, it condenses. This cycle is
shown schematically in Fig. 11-22A.
Elements of this most basic, constant-conductance, heat pipe consist of a working
fluid, a wick structure, and an envelope. The most common wick envelope design
consists of axial grooves in the wall of extruded aluminum tubing, as shown in
Fig. 11-22B. This class of wick is very susceptible to gravity effects during ground
testing, but is relatively inexpensive to produce and very consistent. Heat-transfer
capability is moderate, but sufficient for many applications. Grooves are typically
rectangular or trapezoidal in shape, but more complex shapes such as the "teardrop"
or "keyhole" have been extruded with difficulty. Different working fluids can be used
depending on the temperature range of interest. In most spacecraft applications,
ammonia is the working fluid of choice. Laptop computers, on the other hand, typically use water in heat pipes used to cool high-power chips.

Trapezoidal grooye

Fig. 11-22B. Grooved Heat PIpe. This is an example of the most common wicklenvelope
design which consists of axial grooves in the waD of extruded aluminum tubing.

The most obvious application of a heat pipe is one requiring physical separation of
the heat source and sink. If a heat pipe is used, it is not necessary to mount aU hardware
to be cooled directly on radiator panels, or to use relatively inefficient conductive
couplings. A closely-related class of application is that of the thermal transformer. A
smaIl high-powered box can be mounted on one side of a radiator with integral heat
pipes; the heat generated will be spread out over a large radiator surface. This approach
also permits more efficient use of available "real estate"-the area available for a
radiator is seldom centered symmetrically about the heat source, facing the optimal
direction.

J1
!i

446

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.s

Heat pipes have also been used to reduce temperature gradients in structures to minimize thermal distortion. The telescope tube of the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory
had three ring-shaped heat pipes to minimize circumferential temperature gradients.
The ammonia/aluminum heat pipes worked throughout the eight years of mission life.
The diode heat pipe was first proposed as a means of connecting a device to two
radiator panels 011 opposite sides of a spacecraft, with the understanding that at least
one of the radiators would be free of any direct solar load at all times during the orbit
The diodes would couple the device to the cold radiator, while. preventing heat from
leaking back into the system from the radiator in the Sun. This type of thermal design
problem-in which heat from a temporarily warm radiator or from a failed refrigerator
must be kept from leaking back into the system-is an obvious application for a diode
heat pipe.
The variable-conductance heat pipe can be used to control the amount of active
radiator area, providing reasonably good temperature control without the use of
heaters. This is particularly attractive if electrical power is limited, and this type of
design has been flown on a number of satellites. However, if the application requires
maintaining a component at virtually a constant temperature, feedback control (at the
expense of some heater power) may be employed. A sensor on the baseplate of the
device to be controlled can be routed to an on-board computer, and whenever the
temperature drops below the desirable range, heaters on the variable conductance heat
pipe reservoirs are activated, causing the control gas to expand and block off more of
the radiator area. If the temperature rises above the range desired, power to the
reservoir heaters is reduced, increasing the active radiator area. This concept usually requires less power than using heaters directly on the box or system to be
controlled.
U.5.3 The Thermal Design and Development Process

The first step in the thermal design development process is to make an assessment
of the mission and hardware requirements that will drive the design. This process
begins with reviewing the top-level requirements. As illustrated in Fig. 11-23, these
imposed requirements tend to be very general statements such as: ''maintain all components within allowable temperature ranges under all mission and test conditions";
''be compatible with the mission lifetime"; or ''provide adequate ~". From these
general, often vague, requirements, we must derive more specific requirements that
will be useful in developing the thermal design. Examples of these derived
requirements include:
• Temperature limits and reliability requirements for each component
• Equipment power dissipations and operating modes
• Range of mission orbit parameters
• Operational satellite attitudes
• Attitudes during stressed or failure modes
• Launch phase configurations and attitudes
• Ground cooling needs
• Autonomy requirements
• Thermal-distortion budgets
• Launch-system interfaces

U.5

Thermal

447

• Interfaces with other subsystems, such as
- Payloads
- Structures
- Propulsion
- Telemetry, tracking, and command
- Attitude control
- Computer and data handling
- Electrical power
• Contamination control
• Special thermal control requirements for components such as batteries, crystal
oscillators, and sensors.
Once specific design requirements. have been identified, the thermal design
development process illustrated in Fig. 11-23A begins. This process is a combination
of design selection and supporting analysis. The selection of a viable thermal design
approach may become almost intuitive for an experienced thermal engineer. Detailed
thermal analyses are, however, always required to verify and refine the design. Experience can minimizes the number of time-consuming analysis iterations required to
close in on a final design.
Establishing a preliminary thermal design for the spacecraft is usually a two-part
process. The flTSt is to select a thermal design for the body, or basic enclosures of the
spacecraft. that will serve as a thermal sink for all of the internal components. The
second step is to select thermal designs for various components located both within
and outside of the spacecraft body.
As shown in Fig. 11-23B, we begin by assuming that a passive design will
successfully meet all thermal control requirements. As discussed earlier, a wide range
of thermal control hardware and techniques are available to achieve thermal control,
from simple surface finishes to complex heat transfer and refrigeration systems. The
spacecraft system requirements to minimize weight, cost, and test complexity while
maximizing reliability are usually served best by keeping the thermal design as simple
as possible and by avoiding the use of active components. A design that n;lies only on
surface finishes and insulation blankets will be lighter, far less expensive to build.
more reliable, and easier to test than a design involving heat pipes, louvers. or refrigerators. Therefore, although active components will sometimes be required, they
should be used only when necessary.
Most three-axis stabilized spacecraft use the same basic approach to thermal
control of the spacecraft body, e.g., insulating the spacecraft from the space environment with multi-layer insulation blankets and providing radiator areas with low solar
absorptance and high infrared emittance to reject waste heat High-power components
are usually mounted on the walls of the vehicle, which provides them with a direct
conduction path to the radiating surfaces on the outside. If component powers are high
enough, conductive doublers or heat pipes may be required to spread heat out over a
wider area so that it can be radiated away at a reasonable temperature. Components
mounted on shelves, panels, and structures internal to the vehicle radiate their waste
heat to the outside walls of the spacecraft, where the heat is rejected to space. The overall thermal balance of such a spacecraft is shown in Fig. 11-24.
While an initial design is usually specified through a combination of experience
and simple hand calculations, a thermal analysis of the design in the principal mission
thermal environments must be performed to determine if all temperature control
requirements can be met. We do this by constructing analytical models, which consist
of a geometric math model for calculating radiation interchange factors, and a thermal

448

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.s

Thermal

U.5

449

~ConIIgwaIIon

1I

• OrbIIDaIa

• PreIlm!nmY EquIpment
Tempera1ur8 UmIIs

I

• PreIlm!nmY EquIpment
Power Profiles

!

Assume PassIve
1hermaI DesIgn

CaJcuIaIe EnvIronmental
Heal Loads on SpacecnIft
Cak:uIaIe
• TEqufpmenI
• TCompartmenI

Establish

Assume

ModifIed Passive TCS

'T~

• InsuIaI!on Requirements
• CoatIngs

Assume

Seml-ActIve TCS

Assume
ActIve TCS

EstablIsh
• louver Chanu:!erisllcs
• Heal Pipe Requirements
EstablIsh
• RadIatDr Size
• TransportLoop

Assume

SpecIaITCS

CharacIerfs1Ics

1.._ _ _--1 Establish
• SpecIal RequIremen1s

Fig. 1'-23B. Thermal Design Development Process. This diagram Dlustrates the general
thermal design process, showing the many iterative loops Involved In the process.
(TCS Thermal Control System)

=

Flg.11-23A. Typical Thermal Requirements Flow-Down. Here you can see the general flow
down from Imposed requirements to derived requirements and the resulting hard·
ware implementation.

math model for predicting temperatures. The geometric model is a mathematical
representation of the physical surfaces of the satellite or component and is used to
calculate the radiation couplings between all surfaces in the model. as well as heating
rates to each surface from external flux sources such as solar. Earth IR. and albedo
radiation. The thermal model is usually a luniped-parameter representation of the
thermal capacitance of each node and thermal conduction terms between nodes. and is
directly analogous to an electrical RC network. These models are constructed using a
combination of computer-aided design technologies and hand calculations.
The completed (and debugged) thermal model is run to predict hardware
temperatures tinder worst-case hot and cold conditions. A number of runs may be

rtI ·!

450

sPacecraft Subsyst~

11.s

• Insulate main body with mulb1ayer insulation
(MU) blanket
• Provide low solar absorptivity (ex), high infrared
emissivity (e) radiators to reject waste heat
• Use heaters to protect equipment when satellite
Is in low power mode

Flg.11-24. Thermal Design Approach for Typical 3-axIs Spacecraft. Most three-axis
stabDIzecI spacecraft use an approach shown to control the thermal performance of
the spacecraft body. Typfcally, we insulate the spacecraft from the space environment with multi-layer insulation (MU) and provide radiator areas with low solar at>sorptance and high Infrared emltlance to reject unwanted heal

required to determine what exactly is the worst-case combination of factors, such as
orbit Sun angle, operating mode, vehicle attitude, or surface properties. A number of
parametric runs may also be required to close-in on optimum sizing of radiators. If the
purely passive design is found to be inadequate, we repeat the process using thermal
control hardware elements that are increasingly active in nature as illustrated in
Fig. 11-23B. Once a satisfactory design is found, estimates of thermal control
subsystem weight and power are made and each thermal control hardware element is
specified in detail.

11.5.4 Thermal Control Challenges
The simplest thermal control scenario is to mount dissipative components directly
on the inner surface of the spacecraft external structura1 panels. Some, or all, of the
~xtemal surface of the panel is used to radiate the heat load to space. Local heat loads
mto the panel are spread over the panel area via conduction through the panel. In
higher heat flux situations, thicker facesheets or doubler plates may be needed. In extreme cases, heat pipes can be used to spread the heat load and isothermalize the
radiator or maximize radiator efficiency.
As spacecraft pack density increases, eventually not all components can be
mo~ted to these panels and some will need to be located internally, away from the
radIator panels. For lower power boxes. a radiative view to the spacecraft core or
external radiators may provide sufficient heat transfer to maintain operating temperatures. In more extreme cases, efficient heat transport devices, such as heat pipes, will
be needed to maintain operational temperatures of these components.
As design complexity and performance levels increase, special thermal situations
often occur in the design of spacecraft and instruments. Typical thermal challenges
that may present themselves include:

• Batteries typically require cooler operating temperatures and smaller
temperature ranges than electronic components. For example, nickelhydrogen batteries require minimill temperature differences between each cell

11.5

Thermal

451

and also within the cell for efficient charging, which leads to symmetric cell
packaging. The heater control approach usually necessitates electronic
controllers to minimize cell-to-cell temperature differences.

• External Mechanisms are located outside of the spacecraft where thermal
environments are much more extreme. Careful consideration must be given to
understanding the hot and cold scenarios.

• Optical Elements generally don't like large cold temperature excursions due
to coefficient of expansion mismatch between the optical element glass and the
mounting substrate. For a complicated optical system, with numerous optical
surfaces distributed over an optical bench, bulk temperature control of the
bench may be necessary to maintain end-ta-end alignment of the optical path.
Cold conditions may over-stress the mounting system due to coefficient of
expansion mismatch between the optic and mounting surface leading to
cracked optics. In addition, any optical bench (instrument or spacecraft)
generally requires thermal isolation from components mounted to it to minimize thermal distortion.
• lAsers are typically a large heat source, requiring stable temperature control
that may need to be temperature tuned to the flight models, so adjustable control should be utilized. This could require electronic controllers.

Some components, most usually m. detectors, operate at very cold temperatures
(125 01( and below) and require special cooling systems to achieve this. Advanced
thermal technologies that can be incorporated in these scenarios, include louver
systems, constant and variable conductance heat pipes, phase change materials, capillary loops, and loop heat pipes. Each of these technologies is explained in Sec. 115.2,
Cryogenic cooling can be accomplished by several methods:

• Passive RadiDtors are based on the normal principle of radiative heat rejection
to space; however, they must be shielded from even small environmental heat
loads, like Earth albedo and planetary m., to be effective. Still, they are limited
to the upper cryogenic range. Material selection is critical to prevent parasitis,
heat leaks via conduction. Multiple stage radiators remove these parasitic heat
inputs and the final, coldest stage provides the actual sink for the detector.

• Stored Cryogens are a passive, expendable fluid or gas is used to absorb waste
heat, usually from m. detectors. These systems are relatively cheap and reliable. however, usually only viable for short or infrequent usage due to mass
and volume constraints in packaging the cryogen.

• Refrigerator Systems are active systems that use electrical power to remove
heat over long durations. Vibration, cooling, and longevity issues must be
addressed with these systems.
Many times, the packaging of a particular electronics component yields a relatively
high power per unit area of the component's footprint dimensions, thus limiting the
transfer of the heat into the radiator panel. During the radiator area assessment in the
hot scenario, if the required area is somewhat greater than the footprint dimensions,
the heat can be spread over the required area if the panel facesheet is locally thickened

452

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.5

under the component In extreme situations, the required thickness may increase to a
point where a better spreading device is needed to minimize mass impact. Heat pipes
are typically used in this situation where their large heat transport capability can
readily spread the heat from a large local heat source over a larger area of radiator
panel. A drawback to these devices is that they must be arranged to allow operation
during ground testing. This usually requires them to be level, or a slightly adverse tilt
(evaporator < 0.02 cm above condenser) due to their low pumping pressure from small
differences in capillary forces inside the pipe. In certain situations, a pipe that is
vertical in ground testing can still be utilized, although the heat transfer capacity will
be significantly reduced. These are considered passive devices since no feedback
control is needed. However, it must be understood that they will operate in the
cold scenario as well, resulting in more heater power to maintain component
temperatures.
11.5.5 Heat Balance Estimation
A successful thermal design must include adequate radiator area to accommodate
the maximum operational power during the hottest operational environment without
exceeding allowable temperatures. Heater power may be required to maintain minimum allowable temperatures during nominal operations, especially for propulsion
components and batteries. Most spacecraft also require "survival" heaters to survive
potential reduced-power conditions, although component temperature allowables may
be much lower than in operational cases. Over the lifetime of a typical mission, variations in thermal environments and internal power dissipation combined with degradation of material properties can result in a large number of possible thermal scenarios.
Early in the conceptual design phase, it is essential that the hot and cold extremes of
these scenarios be identified, including variations in the operating condition of the
spacecraft.
Thermal environments depend on orbital characteristics, attitude profiles, and
spacecraft configuration. The typical range of operating environments can be grouped
as follows:

• Low-Earth Orbit (LEO) missions are usually between 400 and 800 km
altitude. Low-inclination orbits at these altitudes have eclipse periOds that are
fairly consistent over the life of the mission. Most Sun-synchronous missions
have fairly constant eclipse periods and a smaller range of Slin angles to
contend with, and have a "cold side" of the spacecraft that is never in direct
sunlight. High inclination, non-synchronous missions have a full range of Sun
angles, and may have weeks or months with no eclipses. Albedo and Earth
infrared inputs (see Table 11-45A and Sec. 11.5.1) are significant contributors
to energy balance for LEO satellites:

• Geostationary (GEO) missions generally maintain constant attitude for
observation or communication. The ± 23.5° angular north-south motion of the
Sun during the year results in some solar input on the north and south facing
sides of the spacecraft, except during the equinoxes. Equinox is normally the
cold scenario for such a mission, with an eclipse season of about 3 weeks with
daily eclipses up to 72 minutes, and minimal solar flux on the north and south
sides during daylight. Usually, the other four sides (Earth, zenith, east, and
west) experience 12 consecutive hours of Sun per 24-hour orbit, and would be
much less efficient radiator surfaces due to this variability. While on station,

Thermal

U.5

453

albedo and Earth infrared radiation amount to about 1% of low-Earth orbit
values, so they can be neglected for most applications.

• High Earth Orbits can be highly eccentric with perigee as low as a few
hundred kilometers, but the apogee may be many thousands of kilometers.
Thermal environments vary accordingly; at perigee, the albedo and IR are
greatest, and at apogee, only direct solar is significant for most cases. If cryogenic systems are employed, the small Earth induced heating contributions
must be assessed.

• Interplanetary Missions can have considerable variation in solar flux, which
varies inversely with the square of the distance from the Sun. For example, the
Cassini mission to Saturn had a Venus flyby, so its solar constant varied from
about 2700 W/m2 at Venus to 15 W/m2 at Saturn. Decreasing solar intensity
presents a huge challenge for missions to the outer planets, requiring alternative means of spacecraft power generation that constrain available heater
power as environments get colder. Missions to Jupiter and beyond typically
employ radioactive power sources, so their waste heat must be distributed
around the satellite by the thermal subsystem. Orbiting a planet presents
further complications, in. that each planet has its own albedo and infrared
radiation characteristics as listed in Table 11-45B.

Radiator Requirements
For most spacecraft, heat balance on radiators is the dominant factor in the thermal
design. Radiator location and coatings can be controlled, and MLI blankets are used
to mimimize heat inputs and outputs for other surfaces. Since the maximum available
radiator area is constrained by the structural size of the spacecraft, hot case scenarios
must be assessed to ensure that sufficient radiator area is available to maintain acceptable temperatures. The first calculations should assess the amount of radiator area
needed to reject the maximum operational heat load while maintaining gradients and
component temperatures within their allowable operational mode range (including
margin) in the hottest environmental conditions. Sometimes, radiator requirements
exceed the available spacecraft surface area. Extended radiators (including deployabies) may be used, but they come with a mass penalty since they must be structurally
supported and thermally coupled to the spacecraft.
For simplicity, most mission scenarios are initially assumed to be a steady-state
energy balance. Balance is achieved when all of the heat sources on a spacecraft are
equal to the heat lost to space. Heat sources include external environmental inputs and
internal heat generation, while the most significant heat losses are usually the
controlled heat rejection from the radiators and heat leaks from MLI insulation and
exposed structures. The heat balance for a typical spacecraft can be estimated as
follows.
From a generalized heat balance equation:

Qin = ~ut
Oexternal + Q internal

= Qradiator + OMu

(11-12)

(11-13)

Where Oexrernal is the environmental heat absorbed, Qinternal is the power dissipation,
Qradiator is the heat rejected from the spacecraft primary radiator surfaces, and QMU

is the heat lost from blankets and elsewhere on the spacecraft

454

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.5

To simplify the hot case calculation, we assume (conservatively) that the net ~u
is negligible, so Qex1emal becomes the flux abSorbed by the radiators only. For an
individual radiator:
(11-14)

TABLE 11-48A. TIlermaI Parameter VarJaUon for Hot and Cold Assessment In Earth Orbit.
ThIs table provides typical values that can be used to assess the worst-case hot
and worst-case cold conditions for spacecraft In Earth orbit
Parameter
rsolar Constant

Substituting Eq. (11-11) for QradiaJor and qex1emal A for Qextemal' the radiator heat
balance becomes:
(11-15)
where Q.mremal is the internal spacecraft heat, ~emal is the external environmental
heat load on the radiator per unit area, A is the area, E is the radiator emittance, C1 is
the Stefan-Boltzmann constant (5.67051 x 10 -8 W/m2K4), and T is the radiator
temperature.
The external environmental load, ~emal' can be broken down into the following
individual heat loads:
~emal = CJsolar + CJaIbedo + qEarthlR

+ 'M1ackload

a ~solar Palbedo Falbedo

Albedo
IR
Radiators:
Solar Absorptance
IR emittance
MU:
Solar Absorptance
IR emissivity
Effectiveness
Power Dissipation

1420W/rr(J.

Cold Case
1360 W/rr(J.

0.30
244W/rr(J.

0.23
218W/rr(J.

MaxImum
Minimum

Minimum
Maximum

0.55
0.67
0.01 cold side
0.03 Sun side
MaxImum

0.35
0.75
0.03 cold side
0.01 Sun side
Minimum

Hot Case

Comments

Early assessment should use
worst-case parameters.

See Sec. 11.5.1
Kapton outer layer
Kapton outer layer
Biased effective emissivity
Based on component estimates

(11-16)

where 'lrolar is the absorbed solar load per unit area, ClaIbedo is the absorbed heat load
. per unit area, qEarthlR is the absorbed Earth IR heat load per unit area, and 'M1ackload is
the radiative heat load from external spacecraft surfaces (solar arrays, antennas) that
is absorbed on the radiator.
.
To size a radiator, one must calculate a value for each of the terms in Eq. (11-16).
The solar term, 'lrolart can be calculated as discussed in Sec. 5.1 and will not be repeated here. Earth IR and albedo loads per unit area, CJEarth IR and CJalbedo.. can be calculated
using the following:
(11-17)
CJEarthlR = E IEIRFEIR
CJaIbedo =

455

. Thermal

U.5

(11-18)

where a and E are the absorptivity and emissivity of the radiator, IEIR and lsoJar are the
intensity of the Earth IR and solar fluxes, and PallJedo is the Earth's albedo. Suggested
hot and cold case values for these parameters are shown in Table 11-48A. The remaining terms, FEIR and Falbedo' are geometrical factors that account for the. direction of the
radiator relative to the Earth and Sun. (See Appendix 0.2) Calculating the radiative
backload from other spacecraft surfaces, CJbackJo'ad' requires geometric modeling of the
spacecraft that is beyond the scope of this discussion. Generally speaking, however, if
the view that a surface has to space is blocked to a substantial degree by views to other
spacecraft surfaces, this backload term can be so large as to make the surface useless
as a radiator. For this reason, radiators are usually located on surfaces that have a
reasonably clear view to space.
Obviously, the most efficient radiator surfaces are those that minimize the external
loads represented by the constituent terms of ~emal. Radiator coatings are therefore
critical to the thermal design; coatings with low solar absorptance minimize Sun and
albedo input, and a high emittance is required to maximize radiation to space.
Backload on the radiator can be minimized by relative location of radiators and
external components, especially solar arrays. Low-Earth orbits generally allow use of
orbit average flux values for heat balance calculations on internal components,since their orbit periods are short relative to the thermal time constant of the
components.

Geosynchronous spacecraft can utilize average fluxes on only the north and south
sides because the Sun maintains a constant angle to those surfaces over an orbit; the
other four sides each get about 12 hours of Sun at varying angles of incidence during
the 24 hour orbit
Example

Problem: Determine the radiator area and heater size needed for a group of
electronics boxes located on the nadir face of an Earth pointing spacecraft. These
boxes have an allowable mounting surface temperature range, while operating, of -10
to +50 °C and a minimum non-operating temperature of -20°C. the electronics boxes
dissipate a maximum of 500 W and a minimum of 400 W when operating and 0 W
when not operating. Assume a 5-year mission in a 500 km altitude, 90 deg inclination
Earth orbit.
Solution: A nadir facing radiator will receive Earth IR and albedo heat loads along
with some direct solar illumination in this low-Earth orbit. The Earth IR load will be
constant around the orbit since the radiator is constantly facing straight down. Albedo
will be at a maximum near the sub-solar point and decrease to near zero as the spacecraft crosses the terminator. Because there is only a brief period, between eclipse
entrance or exit and terminator crossings. when this surface will receive direct solar
illumination at a shallow angle of incidence, we will neglect the contribution of direct
solar load in this calculation. (To be rigorous, one could calculate the solar load using
the equations provided in Sec. 5.1.)
Using Eqs. (11-17) and (11-18) and the tables in Appendix 0.2, we can calculate
the absorbed Earth IR and albedo fluxes for a number of points around the orbit. If we
assume that the radiator has the 5-mil thick silver teflon surface finish commonly used
on radiators in low-Earth orbit, the radiator will have an emittance of 0.78 and a
minimum beginning of life solar absorptance of 0.05. Because the radiator absorptance will increase over its life, however, we must also consider an end-of-life
absorptance value of 0.15 to account for the degradation that will occur over the 5-year
mission. The results of these calculations are shown in Table 1148B.
Because the thermal time constant of a radiator coupled to electronics boxes is large
compared to the orbital period, we can size the radiator to orbit-average fluxes. From

456

Spacecraft Subsystems

U.s

TABLE 11-48B. Earth IR and Albedo Heat Loads Absorbed on an Earth Facing Radiator In
a 500 kin, 90 deg Inclined Orbit. p Is the angle of the Sun out of the orbit
plane.

0

30

60

90

120

150

180

210

240

270

300

330

Avg.

161
0

161
0

161
0

161
2

161
32

161
·56

161

HOT CASE"

0

IR
Albedo
Total

161
75

90

IR
Albedo
Total

161
-0

161
-0

161
-0

161
-0

0

IR
Albedo
Total

148
15

148
13

148
7

148
-0

148
0

148
0

90

IR
Albedo
Total

148
-0

148
-0

148
-0

148
-0

148
-0

148
-0

161
56

161
32

161
2

161
0

161
0

21

182
161
-0

161
-0

161
-0

11.5.6

457

Mass, Power, Telemetry Estimates

Mass
Historically, the TCS mass loosely correlates to the spacecraft dry mass or total

Position In Orbit (deg)

/I

Thermal

11.5

161
-0

161
-0

161
-0

161
-0

161
-0

161
-0
161

148
0

148
0

148
0

148
-0

148
7

148
13

148
5
153

148
-0

148
-0

148
-0

148
-0

148
-0

148
-0

148
-0
148

COLDCASEi'

aHot case: EOl absorptance of 0.15 and maximum albedo (0.30) and Earth IR (244 W/rn2) constants
bCold case: BOl absorptance of 0.05 and mInimum albedo (0.23) and Earth IR (218 W/rn2) constants

Table 11-48A we can see that the hottest case occurs at end of life for an orbit pangle
of 0 deg. If we allow for 10 DC of analysis uncertainty margin, we can use Eq. (11-15)
and set the sum of the maximum electronics waste heat and the heat load absorbed
from the environment under hot case conditions to equal the radiator heat rejection
capacity at 40 DC (313 DK):
500 W + (182 W/m2) A = (0.78) (5.67 x 10-11 W/m2K4) A (313 °K)4

(11-20)

Solving for T, we get a cold case minimum temperature of 297 OK = 24 DC. Subtracting 10 °C for analytical uncertainty gives a minimum operating radiator temperature
of 14°C, which is well above the minimum allowable operating termperature of
-lODe.
To determine the heater power required to keep the electronics above their
minimum non-operating temperature limit, we add 10 DC of uncertainty margin to the
minimum allowable non-operating termperature and use Eq. (11-15) to solve for the
power required to keep the radiator above -10°C under cold case conditions:
(XW) + (148 W/m2) (2.06 m2) = (0.78) (5.67 x 10-11 W/m2K4) (2.06 m2) (263 °K)4

is 2 to 10% of the spacecraft or instrument dry mass. A purely passive thermal control
approach tends toward the lower end of the range. If active control techniques are
used, the mass tends toward the higher end of the range.
As the complete thermal control approach is formulated and a hardware list is
developed component-level estimates can be performed to provide a more accurate
assessment. For low-power spacecraft, the bulk of the thermal mass is usually the
ML!. but if radiator panels or heat transport systems are to be used, their mass
should be estimated early. Any heater controller electronics, as well as all heaters,
wiring, and thermostats, should be included in the thermal control subsystem mass
estimate.
TABLE 11-49.

Thermal Hardware Mass and Power EsUmates. The estimates of mass and
power for typical components of the thermal control system are shown here.

Thermal Component
Multi-layer Insulation
Miscellaneous:
Heaters (kapton)
Thermostats
Thermistors

Mass

Power

0.73 kglm2

0

Various

Various

0.15 kglm

10Wfor
VCHP*

(11-21)

Solving for X, we get a heater power of 131 W needed to keep the electronics above
their non-operating minimum temperature limit under worst-case conditions.

Comments
Based on 15 layers

Based on heater power requirements

Adhesives/paints
Heat Pipes (NHa)

(11-19)

Solving for A, we get an area of 2.06 m2.
To determine if any heater power is required during normal operations, we again use
Eq. (11-15) to calculate the minimum temperature under cold-case conditions. We use
the above area with the cold case power dissipation of 400 W and cold case environmental loads from the 90 deg Pangle orbit to solve for temperature:
400 W + (148 W/m2) (2.06 m2) = (0.78) (5.67 x 10-11 W/m2K4) (2.06 m2) (T)4

spacecraft power generation capability. Typically the thermal control hardware mass

Mass per unit length
Add 1-3 kg each for
VCHP reservoirs
Control power for VCHPs only

LHP Evaporator

2-5 kg

1Q-30W

Radiator Panels

3.3 kglm2

0

Control power
Honeycomb radiator
Add heat pipe mass
if embedded

8ectronlc Controllers
• VCHP

0.2 kg

1-3W

Each

=Variable Conductance Heat Pipe

Power
Thermal control power estimates normally only consist of heater power, unless
electronic controllers are used. The power required for operation of dedicated
electronics used for thermal control should be allocated to the thermal system
estimates.
• Operational: for worst case energy balance determination, these estimates
should be made for the coldest operational scenario. Mechanical thermostats
or. electronic controllers with a combination of proportional, integral, and
differential functionality may provide control of these heaters. Onboard software may also be utilized if sufficient temperature sensors are provi~ed.

458

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.s

• Survival: these estimates should be based on a cold survival scenario. Circuits
should be controlled in the most reliable (and redundant) manner, utilizing the
minimum resources that would likely exist in this mode, e.g., reduced onboard
software capability may not allow for heater control algorithms or fault
detection and isolation routines. For example, hydrazine propulsion systems
require protection from freezing (2 DC) at all times and should be considered
as a survival circuit.
Telemetry and Commands
Temperature sensors that are located inside components are used to ensure the
correct temperature information is monitored and a determination of the thermal
health and safety status of the spacecraft or instrument can be made. Every effort
should be made to provide for sufficient temperature sensors early in the program, to
ensure that sufficient interfaces are available to read these sensors. Thermal commands are usually necessary only when electronic or software heater control is used.
While commands can usually be added late in the design flow, the associated hardware
(relays to enable or disable the circuit) must be identified early.

459

Structures and Mecbanisms

11.6

11.6 Structures and Mechanisms
Thomas P. Sarafin, lnstor Engineering
Peter G. Doukas, Lockheed Martin Astronautics
James R. McCandless and William R. Britton,

Lockheed Martin Astronautics
The structures and mechanisms subsystem mechanically supports all other spacecraft subsystems, attaches the spacecraft to the launch vehicle, and provides for
ordnance-activated separation. The design must satisfy all strength and stiffness
reqwrements of the spacecraft and of its interface to the booster. Primary struct\lre
carries the spacecraft's major loads; secondary structure supports wire bundles, pr0pellant lines, nonstructural doors, and brackets for components typically under 5 kg.
In this section, we describe how to develop a preliminary design for a structures
subsystem. We begin by considering the spacecraft's operating environments and designing the structure with overall spacecraft packaging in mind. After conducting numerous design trades, we then assess each structural member for its most likely failure
modes, possible weight savings, and need for reinforcement. See Fig. 11-25 for details.
Section 11.S.5

-~

-MIssIon
- Launch Vehicle
- Environments -

Requirements

-Envelope
- AccessibOlly
- ProducibUily
- Deline Load Paths

- ConsIrucIIon
OptIons

.

- Test Criteria
- DesIgn Criteria

- Material OptIons

r=::1

1
NO~

~-.-~

~
es

DeIa\Ied
DesIgn

Rg.11-25.

The PreDminary Design Process for Structures and Mechanisms. We move
from left to right, iterating as needed, when designing the spacecraft structure.

11.6.1 Structural Requirements

Structures must endure environments from manufacture to the end of the mission.
Team members should contribute from all disciplines: engineering, manufacturing,
integration, test, and mission operations. This interdisciplinary approach ensures
coverage of all critical requiremen~ven those which seem minor. The following
discussion of the Space Shuttle's external tank structure show why we should not overlook any event in the structure's lifetime.
The aluminum skin of the external tank must have a very tight manufacturing
tolerance. Adding just 0.0254 mm (0.001 in) thickness to the entire shell of its forward
tank for liquid oxygen adds 220 kg to tank mass. Special handling fixtures must cradle
the tank's wall sections to keep them from collapsing during welding, as they cannot

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.6

support their own weight. The nose section of the completed external tank experiences
its most severe loads before launch from winds occasionally gusting against an empty
and unpressurized tank. Table 11-50 lists typical mission phases and possible soUrces
for structural requirements.
TABLE 11-50. Typical Sources for Structural Requirements by Mission Phase. The structural design must account for specific loads in every phase.
Mission Phase

Source of Requirements

Manufacture
and Assembly

• Handling fixture or container reactions
• Stresses Induced by manufacturing processes (welding)

Transport
and Handling

• Crane or dolly reactions
• Land, sea, or air transport environments

Testing

• Environments from vibration or acoustic tests
• Test fixture reaction loads

Prelaunch

• Handling during stacking sequence and pre-flight checks

Launch
and Ascent

•
•
•
•

Mission
Operations

• Steady-state thruster accelerations
• Transient loads during pointing maneuvers and attitude control bums
or docking events
• Pyrotechnic shock from separation events, deployments
• Thermai environments

Steady-state booster accelerations
Vibro-acoustic noise during launch and transonic phase
Propulsion system engine vibrations
Transient loads during booster ignition and bum-out, stage separations,
vehicle maneuvers, propellant slosh, and payload fairing separation
• Pyrotechnic shock from separation events

Reentry and Landing • Aerodynamic heating
(if applicable)
• Transient wind and landing loads

The launch vehicle is the most obvious source of structural requirements, dictating
the spacecraft's weight, geometry, rigidity, and strength. The launch vehicle, selected
orbit, and upper stage determine the spacecraft's allowable weight. See Table 18-4 for
launch-vehicle data.
The core body structure and spacecraft adapter typically account for 10% to 20%
of a spacecraft's dry weight. Appendages, component boxes, and "most secondary
structures apply to the weight of other subsystems. On the structures and mechanisms
subsystem, we normally increase the estimated weight by 10% for fasteners and
fittings. We should also add approximately 25% for weight growth to account for
program additions, underestimating, and inadequate understanding of requirements.
The spacecraft item most often underestimated or neglected is electronic wiring,
sometimes approaching 10% of a spacecraft's dry weight. Of course, allowances for
weight growth may vary for a component or subsystem, based on its design maturity
and schedule risk. As subsystem designs mature, known weights replace growth
estimates.
A spacecraft's size depends on choosing the payload fairing compatible with the
launch vehicle. These protective shrouds shield the spacecraft from direct air loading

11.6

Structures and Mechanisms

461

and contamination. The Spacecraft and its fairing have a prescribed dynamic envelope,
or space allocation, that takes into account expected deflection and the possible addition of thermal protection blankets. The spacecraft must be rigid enough so the fairing
and spacecraft do not encroach on each other's envelope. Although the Space Shuttle
does not have a traditional payload fairing, its cargo bay requires a similar envelope.
See Fig. 18-8 for an example.
The spacecraft's rigidity requirements specify more than maximum deflection. A
launch-vehicle structure has certain natural frequencies that respond to forces from
both internal (engine oscillations) and external (aerodynamic effects) sources. The
launch vehicle contractor lists known natural frequencies for each launch vehicle (see
Table 18-9) and describes associated axial, bending, or torsional (twisting) modes. The
spacecraft structure tailored to avoid the launch vehicle's natural frequencies will
experience much lower loads. Typical resonance sources to avoid include interaction
between the spacecraft and the launch vehicle's control system, oscillations in the
propulsion system (pogo), aerodynamic buffeting during ascent, and bending of the
solid rocket motors.
Engine thrust during launch and ascent exposes the spacecraft to steady-state
acceleration along its axis. This acceleration steadily increases as a booster depletes
fuel (less mass to propel), but comes to an abrupt end, or transient, at burn-out. The
acceleration resumes suddenly, with another transient, as the next stage ignites. Wind
gusts and vehicle maneuvers can induce lateral transients. Transients and steady-state
accelerations cause inertial loads, commonly specified as load/actors, or multiples of
weight at sea level. Table 18-8 shows typical load factors for severa1launch-vehicle
events.
Random vibration from engines and other sources is a critical source of load. At
lift-off, the major source of random vibration is acoustic noise, which radiates from
the engines to engulf the vehicle. Acoustics develop from aerodynamic turbulence
when the vehicle passes through the transonic portion of its flight. Structures with high
surface area and low mass, including skin sections and solar array panels, respond
strongly to acoustic noise.
Load factors do not express random vibration correctly. Three parameters that help
describe random vibration are distribution, frequency content, and magnitude. Typically we assume that a random spectrum has a Gaussian distribution, which determines
the percentage of time the vibration is within certain limits. The frequency content is
most commonly expressed as power spectral density (PSD) even though "acceleration" is more precise than "power" in this application. Vibrational power in a signal is
proportional to acceleration-squared. This is divided by the frequency bandwidth over
which the signal was integrated, to make the quantity independent of bandwidth. Thus,
PSD is in units of g21Hz. To illustrate the power spectral density, we use a log-log plot
of g21Hz against frequency. The square root of the area under the curve is the time
history's rms value. This value equals one standard deviation, cr, of the random acceleration. Figure 11-26 shows a random signal, its normal distribution, and a typical
PSD plot.
Pyrotechnic shock, another source ofload, comes from explosive separation events
involving the boosters, payload fairing, and spacecraft, as well as release mechanisms
for solar panels and other deployable appendages. This shock causes high acceleration
and high frequency over a very short time (see Fig. 18-11). Because shock loads
attenuate quickly, they seldom damage structures removed from the immediate
impulse, but they may seriously harm nearby electronic components.

462

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.6

9

1.0

10

100

1,000

Hz
Rg.11-26.

Random Vibration. The plot shown on the left Is an example of how acceleration
from random VIbration would vary over time. The probability density curve (center),
wHh the same vertical scale, describes the relative likelihood of acceleration beIng
at a given value. ThIs Is a normal dlstnbutlon, wHh each tick mark on the vertical
scale representing a standard deviation, CT. The figure on the righ1 Is a plot of power
spectral density. It describes the frequency content of the vibration and Is equal to
the mean-square acceleration (g2) In a selected frequency band divided by the
width, In Hz, of that band.

In actual design, we combine math models of the spacecraft and launch vehicle to
do a coupled loads analysis. In this analysis, we drive the coupled model with/orcing
functions (force as a function of time or frequency) that are based on measured launchvehicle environments. Before we get to this point, though, we must configure the
structure, select from our design options, and roughly size the structure based on estimated design loads.
11.6.2 Packaging and Configuring the Subsystem

Designers must trade the low weight of a high-density design against the need to
access individual components for testing or replacement before launch. The preliminary arrangement should account for evety component in the design because the
spacecraft's structure inevitably becomes heavier if it must accommodate new components. Added component mass multiplies through higher allowances for weight
growth, heavier structure for support, and more onboard propellants for attitude
control.
The payload and the attitude control approach most strongly influence a spacecraft's configuration, and the launch vehicle constrains it. Chapter 9 discusses
payloads and their requirements. Section 11.1 discusses spin- and 3-axis stabilization
to control attitude. A spin-stabilized spacecraft influences packaging most because the
mass moment of inertia (MOlt about the spin axis must be greater than any other axis
to maintain stability. In 3-axis stabilized spacecraft, we must separate the magnetic
torque rods and the magnetometer (device that senses the Earth's magnetic field) to
preclude any magnetic interference between them.
Sensing devices always require specific fields of view and pointing accuracy. The
packaging designer must locate sensors to be unobstructed by antennas or solar arrays.
• I is the standard notation for both mass moment of inertia and area moment of inertia In this
section, we use MOl for mass moment of inertia and I for area moment of inertia.

11.6

structures and Mechanisms

463

Advanced composite materials often help mounting-structure designs meet requirements for rigidity and thermoelastic distortion.
Communication antennas also require rigidity, thermoelastic stability, and a clear
field of view. One solution is to mount sensOIS and antennas on an appendage that is .
stowed during launch, deployed on orbit for an unobstructed view, and constructed of
advanced composite materials for rigidity and thermoelastic stability.
Components for command and data handling are often vulnerable to the environments of outer space, so we usually bury them in the center of the spacecraft to shield
against radiation. Interfacing wire bundles also weigh less when the processor, data
bus, and other control components are close together.
Propulsion s~systems include reaction-control assemblies and orbital transfer
stages. By purchasing thrusters in multiaxis combinations, called rocket engine
modules, we can reduce the number of propellant-line welds needed on si~ during the
spacecraft's assembly. We usually place those modules on the spacecraft's penphety-far
from the spacecraft's center of mass-but we must keep them from contaminating
sensors, antennas, and solar array cells with propellant gases. A propulsion system
with a low operating pressure helps lessen the. propellant tank's weight. Another
structural challenge is the need to support transfer stages, so the thrust vector remains
aligned with the spacecraft's center of mass. These stages are usual!y h~vy; so,
placing them on the bottom of the spacecraft stack, near the launch vehicle mterface,
helps minimize structural weight.
The configuration of the power subsystem varies with power requirements and
orbital conditions. For example, we must determine where to stow solar panels during
launch and where to deploy them in orbit, so they do not touch or rest in the shadow
of other subsystems. By using fewer folds in the panels, we can keep the deployment
mechanisms simple and more reliable. Finally, batteries should be accessible for
pre-launch testing or replacement and placed where they will be at their optimum
temperature. Thermal control specialists can place components, select materials, and
suggest surrounding structure (open truss or closed skin panels with stiffeners) to help
control temperature. These measures help us avoid using other active temperature
control devices.
H we configure the structure and package components at the same time, we may
make the components part of the load-carrying structure. This concurrent approach
may also produce better symmetry in the structure, which satisfies frequency response
requirements. By using common members and joints throughout the design, we can
lower fabrication costs and more easily meet weight allocations. For example, beams
that make the spacecraft rigid can also support components. Establishing design routes
for wire bundles and propellant lines helps avoid the inefficiencies of cutting through
structure later. We should design special joints to connect members made with different materials because their varying rates of thermal expansion and contraction can be
detrimental. Finally, the spacecraft adapter must transition smoothly from the spacecraft to the interface on the launch vehicle's upper stage.
11.6.3 Design Options .
In designing a structure, we consider optional materials, types of structure, and
methods of construction. To select from these options, we do trade studies to compare
weight, cost, and risk.
A typical spacecraft structure contains metallic and nonmetallic materials. Most
metals are very nearly homogeneous, having constant properties throughout their

Spacecraft Subsystems

464

11.6

composition, and isotropic, having the same properties regardless of direction. Nonmetals are usually formed with composites, or blends of more than one material.
Composite materials are not homogeneous and.are normally not isotropic.
Materials are selected based on:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Strength
Stiffness
Density (weight)
Thermal conductivity
Thermal expansion
Corrosion resistance
Cost

• Ductility (which can prevent cracks)
• Fracture toughness (ability to resist
crack growth)
• Ease of fabrication
• Versatility of attachment options.
such as welding
• Availability

By far the most commonly used metal for spacecraft structure is aluminum alloy, of
which there are many types and tempers. Aluminum is relatively lightweight, strong,
readily available, easy to machine, and low in raw material cost The stiffness-taweight ratio of aluminum is about the same as steel, but the strength-ta-weight ratio is
usually higher. The main advantage of aluminum over steel for flight structures is its
lower density. For the same mass, an aluminum shell or plate would be thicker and
thus able to cany a greater compressive load before it would buckle. If we need harder
or denser materials, we normally choose steel or titanium.
Alloys are available in sheets, plates, extrusions, forgings, and castings. The primary source of material properties is MIL-HDBK-5, Metallic Materials and Elements
for Aerospace Vehicle Structures [U.S. Air Force Materials Laboratory, 1994], which
contains many properties and statistically guaranteed strengths for all commonly used
aerospace metals.
One popular advanced composite is graphite-epoxy, which has graphite fibers for
strength and stiffness in an epoxy matrix. Composite fabric layers normally bond
together in designed fiber orientations, so they can provide properties not available in
homogeneous metallic materials, including extremely high stiffness-ta-weight ratios
and negligible expansion and contraction resulting from temperature gradients. Other
fibers in these composites include boron, Kevlar™, and glass. Graphite and boron
fibers also reinforce metal-matrix composites. Techniques to manufacture and apply
metal-matrix composites are presently less advanced than for epoxy-matrix materials.
Tsai [1987] and MIL-HDBK-17 [1977, 1989] provide more information on composite
materials.
Table 11-51 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of the most commonly used materials in spacecraft design. Table 11-52 shows their representative
properties.
Types of structures include skin panel assemblies, trusses, ring frames, pressure
vessels, fittings, brackets, and equipment boxes. Sometimes only one meets objectives; but we usually have several options. We use monocoque structures, which are
panels .and shells without attached stiffening members, only if applied and reacted
loads are spread out rather than concentrated. A semimonocoque shell has lightweight,
closely spaced stiffening members (stiffeners) that increase its buckling strength. Skinstringer structures have longitudinal members (stringers) and lateral members
(frames) to accept concentrated loads and skin to spread those loads out and to transfer
shear. A truss is an assembly that remains stable under applied concentrated loads with
its structural members loaded only axially. A sandwich structure is a panel or shell

Structures and Mecbanisms

11.6
TABLE 11-51.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Commonly Used Materials.
Advantages

Material

Aluminum

465

• High strength vs. weight
• Ductile; tolerant of concentrated

stresseJ
• Easy to machine
• Low density; efficient In compression

Disadvantages
• Relatively low strength vs. volume
• Low hardness
• High coefficient of thermal
expansion

Steel

• High strength
• Wide range of strength, hardness, and
ductility obtained by treatment

• Not efficient for stability
(high density)
• Most are hard to machine
• Magnetic

Heatresistant

• High strength vs. volume
• Strength retained at high temperatures
• Ducble

• Not efficient for stability
(high density)
• Not as hard as some steels

Magnesium • Low density-very efficient for stability

• Susceptible to corrosion
• Low strength vs. volume

Titanium

• High strength vs. weight
• Low coefficient of thermal expansion

• Hard to machine
• Poor fracture toughness If solution
treated and aged

Beryllium

• High stiffness vs. density

• Low ductmty & fracture toughness
• Low short transverse properties
• Toxic

Composite

• Can be tailored for high stiffness, high
strength, and extremely low ooefficient
of thermal expansion
• Low density
• Good In tension (e.g., pressurized
tanks)

• Costly for low production volume;
requires development program
• Strength depends on workmanship;
usually requires IndMduai proof
testing
• laminated composites are not as
strong in compression
• BrltUe; can be hard to attach

constructed of thin face sheets separated by a lightweight core; this form of construction efficiently adds bending stiffness and stability. Section 15.3 of Sarafin [1995]
provides guidance for selecting the above types of structures.
We can attach structural elements with adhesive bonds, welds, or mechanical
fasteners. But regardless of the selected structure type and method of attachment,
much of the structural subsystem's weight will be in the fittings used to transfer load
from one member to another.
MOst composite material structures have metal end fittings or edge members
attached by bonding, but the bond's strength depends on the process and workmanship. Normally, we must select a proper bonding process through development testing.
We can use bolts instead; however, local stress concentrations around the fasteners can
cause failure at load levels much lower than a composite material can otherwise sustain. Welding is also possible for most aluminum alloys, but heat from welding can
lower material strength near welds by more than 50%. If we need stiffness more than
strength, we may choose welding over mechanical joints. As with bonding, welding
processes require strict development, control, and testing.
The strength of mechanical fasteners, such as rivets and bolts, is very dependable
as a result of process controls, inspections, and frequent sample testing. But to fully

466

Spacecraft Subsystems

TABLE 11-52.

Design

11.6

Properties for Commonly Used Metals [M1L-HDBK-5G,1994]. The

design allowable stresses given here are statistically guaranteed for at least 99%
of all material specimens. Strengths shown are for the fongltudlnaJ direction (rolf.
Ing or extrusion direction) of the material; strengths are usually lower In the longtnmsverse (across width) and short-transverse (through thickness) directions.
Material
Alloy and

Form
Aluminum
2219-T851
1" Plate

p

FlU
Fey
E
1()3 kg/m3 1o&Nlm2
1OSNlm2
1o&Nlm2
(lbnn3) (1()3lbnn2) (103 Ibnn2) (108 Ibnn2)
2.85
(0.103)

420
(61)

320
(47)

6061-T6
Bar

2.71
(0.098)

290
(42)

240

68

(35)

(9.9)

7075-T73
Sheet

2.80
(0.101)

460
(67)

380
(55)

7.86
(0284)

860
(125)

A-286
2"Bar

7.94
(0287)

InconeJ718
4"Bar

72

e
%

a
1o-erC
(1o-erF)

7

22.1
(12.3)

10

22.9
(12_7)

71
(10.3)

8

22.1
(12.3)

620
(90)

196
(28.5)

16

112
(62)

970
(140)

660
(95)

201
(29.1)

12

162
(9.0)

8.22
(0297)

1280
(185)

1,080
(156)

203

12

(29.4)

122
(6.8)

1.77
(0.064)

270
(39)

165
(24)

45
(6.5)

6

25.4
(14.1)

Titanium
TI-6Af.4V
Annealed Plate

4.43
(0.160)

900

855
(t24)

110
(16.0)

10

(130)

8.8
(4.9)

Beryllium
AMS7906
Bar

1.85
(0.067)

(47)

290
(42)

2

11.5
(6.4)

Steel
17-4PH H1150z
Bar

(10.5)

Heat-Res. Alloy

Magnesium
AZ31BH24
Sheet

320

-

= Densi/y
=ABowabIe Tensile IJ1IImate Stress, the highest unI-axIaJ tensile stress a material can sustain before
rupturing.
Fcy =Allowable Compressive Yield Stress, the compressive stress that causes a permanent deformation of
0.2% of the specimen's length.
E = Young's Modulus, ILk.a Modulus of EIastIciIy. the retfo of stress to strain (length change divided by
orfgInaJ length) In the Dnear elastic range (see Sec. 11.6.6).
e =Elongation, a measure of ductfllly, equaJ to the percentage change In length caused by plastlc
deformatfon prior to rupture.
a = Coefflcient of Thermal ExpansIon, a measure of strain per degree temperature change. Values shown
p

Flu

for a are at room tempe!BtUre.

~evelop fastener strength. we must provide adequate fitting thicknesses, fastener spacmg, and edge distances. The torque value for installing a tension fastener must provide
a preload that will maintain stiffness and preclude fatigue, which is a failure resulting
from cracks that form and grow because of cyclic loading_ A locking feature, typically

11.6

Strnctures and Mechanisms

467

a deformed thread in the nut or insert, will prevent a threaded fastener from backing
out when the structure vibrates. Many similar guidelines help us design a dependable
struCtural joint.
11.6.4 Structural Design Philosophy and Criteria
To develop a structure light enough for flight, and to keep spacecraft affordable, we
must accept some risk of failure. Material strengths vary because of random, undetectable flaws and process variations, and loads depend on unpredictable environments.
Random variables affect the adequacy of most structures, such as a dam whose load
depends on how much it rains; but for space missions, we must accept a higher probability of failure than for most other types of structures. Launch loads are affected by
many different random variables, such as acoustics, engine vibrations, air turbulence,
and gusts, and we seldom have enough data to confidently model the probability
distributions of these variables_
Because of loads uncertainty, we cannot accurately quantify the structural reliability
of a spacecraft. We can approximate it, however, and we can develop design criteria
that will provide acceptable reliability. Let us work backwards from a subsystem-level
reliability to understand how conservative our design approach should be for an individual structural part.
If we select a goal for structural reliability of 99% (we probably should aim higher),
which means there is a 1% chance of a mission-ending structural failure, we must
design each structural element to much higher reliability. If the structure has 1,000
parts whose failure would jeopardize the mission, and if their chances of failure are
independent, each must have 99.999% reliability (0.999991000 =0.99, from probability theory). This explains why design criteria may appear so conservative_ To achieve
appropriate reliability, many programs use the following ground rules:
• Use a design-allowable strength for the selected material that we expect 99%
of all specimens will equal or exceed.
• From available environmental data, derive a design limit load equal to the
mean value plus three standard deviations_ This means there will be 99_87%
probability that the limit load will not be exceeded during the mission, assuming tIie load variability has a Gaussian distribution. Because data will be
limited, wI? can only approximate the true probability level of the design load;
but "3-sigma" remains the goal. (Some programs aim for 99% probability
instead of3cr.)
• Multiply the design limit load by a factor of safety, then show that the stress
level at this load does not exceed the corresponding allowable strength_
• Test the structure to verify design integrity and/or workmanship, to correlate
analytical models, and to protect against human errors.
Table 11-53 summarizes the criteria used to design space structures_
Space programs use different factors of safety. but mQst recognize the need to
balance the factors with the type of structure and scope of testing. Factors of safety are
highest for pressure vessels and for structures we will not test. For most other
structures, a contractor will be able to choose from several test options. Table 11-54
shows the test options for an unmanned launch. If personnel safety is at risk, as for a
Shuttle launch or during ground handling, we use higher factors.

468

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.6

TABLE 11-53. Terms and Criteria Used In Strength Analysis. We design space structures to
meet specified or selected criteria for preventing yield and ultimate failures. A
yield (aOure Is one in which the structure suffers permanent deformation that
degrades the mission; ultimate failure Is rupture or coDapse. Two factors of
safety-one for yleld and one for ultimate-typically apply to a structural assembly, and depend on the selected test option (Table 11-54). For each structur8i
mamber, the allowable load, the design load, and the margin of safety each have
two values, one for yleld and one for ultimate.
Term
Load Factor

DefinlUon
A multiple of weight on Earth, representing the force of inertia thet resists
acceleration. The load factor appfies in the direction opposite that of the
acceleration. For example, an object under an acceleration of 5 g, where
g is the gravitational acceleration, has a load factor of -5; if that object
weighs 500 N (a mass of 51 kg), the force it exerts on its support structure
1s-2,5oo N.

UmitLoad
The maximum load expected during the mission or for a given event, at a
(or design limit load) specified or selected statistical probabnity (typically 99% for expendable
launch vehicles and 99.87% for launches with humans aboard). The load
can be acceleration, load factor, force, or moment
Anowabie Load or
Stress

The highest load or stress a structure or material can withstand without
failure, based on statistical probability (usuaRy 99%; I.e., only 1% chance
the actuaJ strength is less than the aRowable).

Factor of Safety, FS A factor applied to the limit load to obtain the design load for the purpose
of decreasing the chance of failure.
Design Load

Umit load multiplied by the yleld or ultimate factor of safety; this value
must be no greater than the corresponding allowable load.

Design Stress

Predicted stress caused by the design load; this value must not exceed
the corresponding allowable stress.

Margin of Safety, MS A measure of reserve strength:
MS = Allowable load (or stress)
1~ 0 to satisfy design criteria
Design load (or stress)

TABLE 11-54. Typical Test Options and Factors of Safety for Missions wHhout Humans
Aboard. [DoD-HDBK-343]. See Table 11-53 for definitions and use.
Design Factors of Safety
Option

YIeld

Ultimate

1. Uitimate test of dedicated quarJfication article (1.25 x limit)

1.0

1.25

2. Proof test of aR flight structures (1.1 x limit)

1.1

1.25

3. Proof test of one flight unit of a fleat (1.25 x Omit)

125

1.4

4. No structural test

1.6

2.0

Typically, a program Win vary the test option for different components depending
on ~ of structure, material or method of construction, weight criticality, perceived
test difficulty, program schedule, and planned quantity of flight articles.
We should proof test (option 2) each flight article if strength is significantly affected by workmanship or process variations. The test conditions should apply the

11.6

structures and Mechanisms

469

critical stresses in all load directions possible during the mission. Proof tests should
also include the effects of predicted temperature changes during the mission, which
can be significant in certain types of structures. Proof testing is the only viable option
for advanced composite structures and bonded joints, unless we can become confident
that our processes are controlled well enough to keep strength variations low. We also
proof test all pressure vessels.
If strength is relatively insensitive to workmanship, such as for most mechanically
fastened metals, we can choose any of the four test options. When building many articles, we can save money by testingjust one (option 3), but this option carries a weight
penalty because of its high factors of safety. Alternatively, we can build a dedicated
qualification article and use the lower factors of safety that go with the "Ultimate Test"
(option 1). With this approach, we have three additional benefits:
1. We can shorten the flight-article development schedule by conducting the
test program in parallel.
2. We can use the test article as a pathfinder for launch-site operations.
3. The impact of test failure is not as severe.
We must weigh these advantages against the cost of building the test article, for which
we must use the same processes as for the flight structure.
Option 4 (''No Test") can be risky, and we must use it with caution. The space
industry has no design codes, such as for many commercial structures, and relies
heavily on testing to verify structural integrity. Without a test, a critical analysis error
or oversight could lead to a mission-ending structural failure, even with high factors
of safety. However, with caution, we can confidently use this option for relatively simple structures. The "no test" option may be most cost effective for structures designed
for stiffness rather than strength.
To provide confidence the structure will survive multiple loading cycles, we also
perform fatigue analysis. Fatigue is a much greater concern for aircraft than for most
primary structures in a spacecraft because launch is of such short duration. But if
stresses are high enough, it does not take many cycles for a material to fatigue, and
launch is not the only event that can cause fatigue damage. Ground testing and transportation can significantly degrade service life. Structures sensitive to high-frequency
vibrations or on-orbit thermal cycling are particularly susceptible to fatigue.
All materials have internal defects, most of which are microscopic. The number,
sizes, and locations of these defects all contribute to high variability in fatigue life
between specimens of the same material. In a fatigue analysis, we compare the number
of cycles at the limit stress level with the test-determined average number of cycles at
which failure occurs. We account for variability in a material's fatigue life by multiplying the predicted number of load cycles over the mission life by a scatter factor of
four [Rolfe and Barsom, 1977].
To account for the possibility of a large pre-existing flaw in a critical location of a
structural part, we can establish afracture control program. This includes inspections
of raw materials and fabricated parts for defects, special handling procedures for
critical parts, andfracture-mechanics safe-life analysis. This analysis, which is a semiempirical method of predicting crack growth and part life, is more conservative than
fatigue analysis because we assume an initial crack exists at the location of peak stress.
We set the size of the assumed initial crack equal to the minimum our inspection
methods can reliably detect. MIL-HDBK-5G provides fatigue and fracture mechanics
data for most metals.

470

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.6

11.6.5 Preliminary Sizing of Structoral Members

To size the structural members of a spacecraft, we consider stiffness, strength, and
weight We will rarely find a design in the first iteration that is acceptable for all three.
Before the design is final, we will perform many iterations that also consider fatigue
life, cost. and changes in subsystem requirements.
Stiffness-Flexibility is a measure of how much a structure deflects under unit
load. Stiffness is a measure of force required to cause a unit displacement. (For a
single-degree-of-freedom system, stiffness is the inverse of flexibility.) A structure's
mode shapes and natural frequencies of vibration depend on its stiffness and mass
properties. We discussed typical considerations for stiffness in Sec. 11.6.1.
We can estimate the primary frequencies of a stowed spacecraft by representing it
with an equivalent beam, which simulates mass properties and core stiffness, then
using simple beam-frequency equations provided in Sec. 11.6.6. As the design
evolves, we construct a finite element model (a mathematical representation of the
structure) to obtain more accurate predictions of mode shapes and frequencies. For a
given mode of vibration, most finite element software can identify the locations in a
structure that have the most strain energy, which is the energy absorbed when a structure deforms under load. Reinforcing the areas with high strain energy is the most
efficient way to stiffen a structure.
A structural assembly is usually more flexible than predicted by a math model
because of local flexibility in mechanical attachments. Thus, even if our model demonstrates the design is adequate, we may find out during testing that the structure
doesn't meet stiffness requirements. It usually doesn't cost much in weight to stiffen
a joint-the key is being aware of stiffness in the design of attachments. We should
also not cut a stiffness requirement too close before verifying it by test.
Strength-We can use various methods to predict distributions of intemalloads,
depending on the structure's complexity and the scope of our analysis. Free-body
diagrams show applied load, which in preliminary design equals weight multiplied by
load factor at the center of gravity, and the reactions necessary for static equilibrium.
With these diagrams, we can easily determine member loads in a statically determinate structure, which has just one solution for member loads that satisfies equilibrium.
Finite element analysis is the most efficient method of predicting loads in a statically
indeterminate structure, which has redundant load paths.
To have adequate strength, the structure must not rupture, collapse, or deform such
that its function is impaired. Primary structural members made of ductile materials
seldom rupture in tension for two reasons: (l) Most structures are statically indeterminate, and ductile materials will stretch enough prior to failure for loads to redistribute.
(2) Tension is an easy mode of failure to assess for a member of constant cross-section
and is seldom overlooked. Instead, tension members fail most often at their attachments: fittings, welds, fasteners, and adhesives.
Stability is a structure's resistance to collapsing under compression. Compressive
failures are the most sudden and catastrophic, and they are often the hardest to predict.
An overall instability failure of a column is called buckling. This is the kind offailure
we would expect if we pushed on the ends of a long, slender rod. The load at which a
column buckles decreases with the square of its length. Crippling is a compression
failure that starts with local buckling of thin-walled flanges or webs in a member's
cross-section.
We often design panels in skin-stringer structures to buckle under compressive
loads, with shear being transf~ by diagonal tension. This is a common practice for

11.6

Structures and Mechanisms

471

eight-critical structures and is not catastrophic if we design the rivets, stringers, and

~e members properly. Diago~al tensi~n will in~uce lateral loads in edge members
that cause compression and bending, as discussed m Bruhn [1973].
We also must check that structural elements do not yield, or take on permanent
deformations that can jeopardize the mission. Yie~ding is a c~~teristic of all
truCturaI materials except those that are perfectly brittle (no ductility). Other defor~tions can be detrimental as well, such as shifting in mechanical joints, so we must
assess them as well.
. . .
..
When assessing rupture and collapse, we use desIgn ulttmate loads, which are limit
loads multiplied by the ultimate factor of safety. We ~ th~ yi~ld fa~or of safety to
assess permanent deformations. The onset of compressIve yteldmg will o~ be followed by collapse because of reduced stiffness, so we should ensure there will be no
compressive yielding at design ultimate loads. .
. .
.
Weight-Designers of flight structures qwckly develop an mstinct for meeting
requirements with the lightest structure. Throughout preliminary design, the configuration and loads will change, and we will have to increase the sizes of many structnnll
elements. We will also find elements that are unnecessari!y hea~, but ~e. w~'t
always change the design. As the design becomes more detailed, weIght optilmZation
..
.
becomes increasingly difficult and complicates producti~n..
At each design iteration, we compare a component. s weIght W1~ Its allocation.
Once the allocation has been met. we focus our attention on other Issues. The best
design will seldom be the lightest design-it will be the one that is optimal for the
system, considering performance, reliability, and cost
11.6.6 Structoral Mechanics and Analysis
A part made from a solid material will change shape as ~orce is exerted OD. it
Mechanics ofmaterials is the term used to describe ho",: materials ~nd to apPli~
forces and other environments. The most basic term m mechamcs of materials IS
stress, (7, which is the load, P, in a member, divided by its cross-sectional area, A,
(Fig. 11-27).

Load
Area

P
A

(75--5-

(11-39)

Typical units for stress are N/m2 and Iblin2 or psi.
Strain, e. is a dimensionless measure of deformation for ~ given load. In Fig. 11-27
the bar's length, L, is increased by IlL in response to the axtalload, P.
IlL
L

Ea-

(11-40)

Solids experience some thinning when ~loDga~ under an axial ~oad. p'0isso7l'S
ratio, v, which describes this phenomenon, IS the ratio of lateral-ta-axtal strain.
Elateral
va
--

Eaxial

(1141)

Poisson's ratio for· metals lies in the range of 0.28 to 0.33.
The stiffness of a material is the relationship of its stress to strain for a given load.

472

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.6

473

Structures and Mecbanisms

11.6

rupture stress (ultimate stress). Otherwis~, a crack ~ould form and possib.ly grow
uncontrollably until the part ruptures. Bnttle matenals also are not as resistant to
'mpact loads' the area under a material's stress/strain curve indicates how much
~nergy it can ~bsorb before it ruptur,es. Figure 11-28 shows representa~,:e stress/strain
curves for ductile and brittle matenals. Refer to Table 11-52 for statistically guaranteed design stresses for commonly used alloys.

p

C Relatively BriIIIe (casllron)

c
Rg.11-27.

DucIiIe (aluminum alloy)

Stress and Strain. Stress is load, P, divided by area, A Strain Is the change In
length, tot, dMded by the Initial length, L

We express it as the modulus ofelasticity" or Young's modulus, E:

E=(1

e

= Proportional LbnIt
B= Yield Stress
C = UIIIrnaJe Stress

A

(11-42)

Values for E were shown in Table 11-52. Metals typically start by exhibiting a
linear relationship between stress and strain. Strain in this region is termed elastic
because it will return to zero after the load is removed.
Beyond a stress called the proportional limit (normally assumed to be the same
value in tension and compression), a material's stress/strain curve is no longer linear.
In other words, if we design our structure such that its material is stressed above the
proportional limit, linear methods of analysis would no longer apply. This can be risky
because so many of our methods of analysis are based on the assumption of linearity;
any other assumption would make loads analysis, in particular, so cumbersome it
would be impractical. Inelastic effects influence structural stability more than anything else. An effective guideline for preliminary design is to keep the design ultimate
compressive stress below the material's proportional limit.
Above the elastic limit, which is often indistinguishable from the proportional limit
but can be higher, the material will undergo residual strain (plastic strain), which
remains after the load is removed. Convention has defined the yield stress to be the
stress that would cause the material to have a residual strain of 0.2%. Although the
material actualIy begins to yield at the elastic limit, such initial yielding is often not
noticeable in a structural assembly. For design, we commonly use the traditionally
defined yield stress, based on the assumption that 0.2% permanent strain would not be
detrimental. To design to this value, we need to make sure our structure would still
function properly if it sustained the corresponding permanent deformation.
A material that can yield substantially before rupturing is termed ductile. Ductile
materials can survive local concentrations of strain without failing. resist crack formation, and allow parts to be shaped through hammering and bending. Conversely, brittle
materials, such as ceramics, do not deform plastically before rupturing. In designing
with brittle materials, we must make sure the local concentration of strain around a
discontinuity, such as a drilled hole, does not cause an elastic stress that exceeds the
• Elasticity is the characteristic of a material to return to its original dimensions after an applied
force is removed.

StraIn (E)

Rg.11-28.

Representative Stress/Straln Curves for Ductile and Brmle Metals. We generate curves such as these from uni-axial tensile tests. The slope of the linear region
is the modulus of elasticity. When the material Is unioaded, even when stressed
above the proportional limit, stress is again proportional to strain according to the
elastic modulus. The yield stress Is the stress that causes a permanent strain of

0.002.

Beams are very common structural members. We characterize a beam by how it is
supported. Examples are described in Table 11-55 and can occur in various combinations.
TABLE 11-55.

Beam Examples.

Name

Constraints

Examples

Cantilevered

One end constrained against translation
and rotation; other end free

Diving board

Simply Supported

Both ends constralned against
translating, but free to rotate

Plank placed across a stream
for hikers to cross

RIgidly Supported

Both ends constrained against
translation and rotation

Roor joists

Continuous Support

Beam's entire span is supported

RaIlroad track, ski

Loads on beams may be concentrated forces, distributed weights or pressures, or
rotational loads, called bending moments. Figure 11-29 shows the symbols commonly
used for beam characteristics. Figure 11-30 includes examples of sketches called
free-body diagrams, showing beams in static equilibrium. Beams are said to be in
static equilibrium when they fully react all applied forces and moments-a very
important prerequisite for static structural analysis.

474

Spacecraft Subsystems

Oeser/pUon

Symbol

Schematic

DImensIon

Concentrated axIal load

PorF
W[lfweight)

/

Force

/

Force

Lateral, or shear load

V

Concentrated reaction

R

Uniform, distributed load

w

Varying, distributed load

w(x)

£tffffi

Force per unit length

M

C

Force times distance

AppDed bending moment,
reactive bending moment

FIg. 11-29.

11.6

a-.JV
a:=:=i

Case (8): SImply Supported

r-;jV

(A): cantJlevered Beam

475

(8): Deformed Shape

,-w(x)

stretch • tension

rPTTm

.::_~_,_-

shorten - """'",n•••,."",

_+x

~
BtHH

Force
(equal, opposite p)

Force per unit length

(C): Any Beam

Cross-sectton

--I=-

Cross-section Shape
(section A-A)

Beam Symbols and Schematics.

Case (A): cantilevered

structures and Mecbanisms

11.6

FIg. 11-31.

Case (A): Free-Body DIagram

t

~---~~VL
r

Case (8): Free-Body Diagram

Bending Stress
Qlnear dIstribution)
(sIde view)

Free-Body Showing Loads
(side view)

Bending and Shear In a CantIlevered Beam. Bending stresses vary Dnearly,
peaking In the parts of the section that are farthest from the neutral axis (centrolclal
bending axis). Shear stresses vary nonlinearly and are maximum at the neutral axis.
Magnitudes of both bending and shear stresses vary for different cross-sections.

dV
-=w(x)

(11-43)

dx

The shear force also relates to the change in bending moment along the beam.
dM
dx

V=FIg. 11-30.

Common Beam Cases with Associated Free-Body DIagrams. The "brick" wall or
rigid left-hand support In case (A) can be replaced with the bendIng moment, M,
equal to Vtlmes L

(11-44)

When the applied force is continuous so that V can be differentiated, the following is
also true:
(11-45)

Some of the common beam equations and relationships can be explained by use of
the cantilevered beam example of Fig. 11-3IA. The distributed lateral load. w(x),
places the beam in a state of bending and shear. We can see evidence of the bending
from the fact that the deformed beam is no longer straight (Fig. 1I-3IB). The shear is
the latera1 force transmitted along the beam's length. The shear reaction, R, at the fixed
end must be equal and opposite to the sum of w(x) or the beam would no longer be in
equilibrium.
The beam's internal shear forces and bending moments can be expressed as functions of the applied load w(x). The local variation in the shear force equals the load at
any point along the beam.

The force w(x) in Fig. 11-31 is neither tensile nor compressive as it is not applied
along the beam's axis. However, from the shape of the deflected beam, we can see that
the upper surface of the beam is stretched; this material is in tension. Likewise, the bottom material is shortened and is in compression. The tensile and compressive stresses
are necessary to react the applied bending load. The bending moment increases for
sections of the beam closer to the fixed end. For any individual cross-section of the
beam,. the tensile and compressive stresses are maximum at the upper and lower
surfaces. Provided the maximum stress remains below the proportional limit,. these
stresses v~ linearly for parallel surfaces inward from the extremities, finally reaching
zero at a line called the neutral axis (Fig. 11-31C). Shearing stresses
vary nonlinearly
.

.

476

spaceeraft Subsystems

structures and Mftilanisms

11.6

477

al~ng the ~oss-section and, unlike bending stress, reach a maximum at the neutral
axIS. Extensive beam equations for stress, deflection, and reactions to applied loads are

in Roark and Young [1975).
We can quantify a beam's ability to resist bending loads using the second moment
of area of ~ cro~s-section. It is usually referred to as area moment of inertia, I, (or
r:wmr;nt oflrl!rtiafor the section) ~d should not be confused with mass moment of
'ru:~a used m control system analysIS. The area moment of inertia about an arbitrary
axIS IS

[axis

=fArea idA

.

(11-46)

x

x

where y is the distance from the centroid to the infinitesimal area, dA. Figure 11-32
presents values of I for several commonly used sections. For boxes and tubes we find
the [ for a section by subtracting the I of the ''hole'' from the total.
'
Y

Ay

Ay2

14

9

126

6

5

30

14

14

34

170

Section

b

h

A

A

7

2
6

2

B

C

7

leg

Ixx

1134

4.67

1138.67

150

18.00

168.00

14

4.67

~
1325.34

Step 1) Calculate each parrs L (I =tmJ ;12)
Step 2) Andsectlon's neutral axis. YNA=kAy/kA=170/34 =5.00
Step 3) Calculate I for axis x-x. Ixx =l:leg +l:Ay2 =1325.34

b-L

NAST

I-s-I

Step 4) Equate I at the neutral axis. INA = Ixx --;4(y2NA)
=1325.34 -"(34)(25) = 475.34 cm2

Fig. 11-33.

Method for Finding Neutral AxIs and Moment for InerUa for Complex SectIons.

1= BH3 _ bh 3

12

Fig. 11-32.

12

Common SectIons and Their Centroldal Moments of Inertia. For boxes and
tubes, we find the I for the section by subtracting the inner I from the outer I. For a
very thin annulus, 1= 7t ,3 t.

For calculations of [ with respect to an axis other than the neutral axis, we use the
parallel axis theorem.
[(any parallel axis) =[(neutral axis) +Ad 2
(11-47)
where A is the ~-sectional area, and d is the distance between the two parallel axes.
The. parallel axIS theorem allows us to find the area moment of inertia for complex
sections, such as the I-beam in Fig. 11-33. Note that the area moment of inertia
increases for a reference axis other than the neutral axis.
The v~ue for b~ing stress, ab' is given in Eq. (11-48) for a point on a symmetric
cross-section at a distance, c, from the neutral axis. Use of Eq. (11-48) assumes that

cross-sections remain planes after bending so that stresses will increase linearly away
from the neutral axis. To predict stress va1ues above the material's proportional limit,
we would use inelastic methods [Bruhn, 1973).
(11-48)
When a column under axial compression suddenly deflects laterally, or bows, we
say that it buckles. Such an occurrence is usually catastrophic. Theoretically, a Jinearelastic column in compression will buckle at a critical, or Euler buckling load, Pcr '
given by
2
7t EI
B =-cr - (L,)2

(11-49)

where I: 'is an effective length, dependent on the column's end conditions as shown in
Fig. 11-34. This equation applies only if the axial stress at buckling (Pcr I A) does not

478

Spacecraft Subsystems

1l.6

Strudures and Meclumisms

11.6

exceed the material's proportional limit Otherwise, we would replace E in this equation with Ef , the tangent modulus, which is the slope of the stress/strain curve at the
operating stress level (the buckling stress, in this case). Premature column buckling
can also occur as a result of imperfect geometry and local buckling of flanges or webs
in the column. See Sarafin [1995] or Bruhn [1973] for details.

1,000

Theoretical
i;"

.Ie

~p

~p
Free

PInned

E

i

~p
Pinned

/

100

[,0

V ~~
1.

OJ

c

r

iII

L'=2L

L'=L

L'= 0.7 L

FIxed

PInned

FIxed

479

10

~I"

....

J.
.A~ ~

~

,"-

rlt
500

700
1,000
2,000
~3,ooo

IIIJ!III"':

:J

III

L

1
Rg. 11-34.

10

100

1,000

10,000

Ir ~1- v2
rt

Effective Lengths for Columns with DIfferent End Conditions. The square of a
column's effective length, L~ Is inversely proportional to the force that would cause
the column to buckle elast/caDy. ConceptuaJly, the effective length Is the length over
which the buckled shape would approximate that of a buckled column with pinned
ends (center figure). For example, If tha cantilevered column shown at left were to
buckle, its free end would deflect laterally, whOe its fixed end would not translate or
rotate. ThIs shape Is the same as half the shape of a buckled plnnecl-end column,
so L'for the cantilever Is 2L

Rg.11-35.

Coefficients of Axial Compressive Buckling for Long Curved Plates. The
circumferential dimension Is measured as an arc.

~Stress

_ ___

The elastic buckling stress, O"CTt for curved skin panels in compression is given as

2 (t)2

k:rr. E

O"cr

=

12(I-v2) b

(11-50)

MaxImum
Tension

where t is panel thickness, b is panel width, v is Poisson's ratio (Eq. 11-41) and k is a
geometric coefficient. Figure 11-35 graphs values of k for curved panels where r is the
radius of curvature and is used to compute the independent variable on the graph.
We can quickly evaluate combined axial, lateral, and bending loads on a thin-wall
cylinder using the equivalent axial load, Peq (Fig. 11-36):
2M

Peq =P±R

(11-51)

where M and R are defined on the figure.
The basis for Peq is that bending stress will be greatest at the two points farthest
from the cylinder's neutral axis (one point in tension, the other in compression).
B:cause lateral and bending loads can usually come from any direction (wind or drag),
this peak stress can occur at any point Therefore, we must size the cylinder for the load
that would create this peak stress along the cylinder's circumference. ~ is an axial
load on a cylinder that would result in a uniform stress equal to a peak sfress created
by a combination of an axial load and bending moment

Rg.11-36.

Equlvelent AxIal Load. The cyUnder at the left can be exposed to axial (P),shear
(V), or bending loads (M). Note that a bending moment at the base of the cylinder
could be created either by the applied bending moment. M, or the lateral load, V.
applied somewhere above the base Qateral load times moment arm).

Pressure vessels are composed of doubly-curved shells such as spheres or ellipsoids. See Fig. 11-37. By doubly-curved, we mean that the surface geometry can be
dermed when two radii of curvature are known. Typical names for these radii are the
longitudinal or meridional radius ofcurvature, designated R",. and the circumferential
or hoop rODius of curvature, Rh , In all cases, these radii are measured petpeDdicu1ar to
the shell, not the central axis of symmetry. Figure 11-38 illustrates this double curvatuR.

480

Spacecraft Subsystems

-e-

Sphere

--e-

1l.6

structures and Mechanisms

lU

481

Rm= Rh =constant

Prolate Spheroid

Oblate Spheroid

Truncated Cone

Rm*Rh
(both vary along surface)

R m =R h
(both vary along surface)

Rm=oo,
R h varies linearly along surface

Fig. 11-37. Characteristics of Doubly-CUrved Shells. In each case. the horizonteJ line Is the
longitudinal axis of symmetry.

Sh~lls may buckI~ under compressive loads. The equation for the elastic cylinder

(A) Meridional or Longitudinal
Radius of Curvature
• Measured perpendicular
to shell
• Defines curvature of arq ABC
• Center need not fie on axis of
symmetry
• Can vary along the meridian

(8) Hoop or Circumferential
Radius of Curvature
• Measured perpendicular to shell
• Center must lie on axis of symmetry
• Will be constant along curve abc for a shell
of revolution (defines a cone whose edge
is perpendicular to the shelQ
• Can vary along the meridian

Fig. 11-38. RadII of Curvature for Doubly-Curved Shells. Together, the meridional and hoop
radII of curvature fully descnbe the geometry of a doubly curved shell.

buckIings~s'UcplS

U cr

Et
=0.6r Ii
(material v =0.3)

~h~ r is a reduction factor used to correlate theory to test results. Thin-shell buck~g IS ver"f sensitive to minor imperfections in shape, so r can be as low as 0.15 if the
thIn Sh~1I1S badly dented. The reduction factor depends on a geometric parameter rp
for cylinders.
' ,
1
rp = 16

fR
Vt

(for

r = 1.0 -

R

t

L

< 1,500 and R < 5 )

0.901(1.0 - e~

(11-53)

= pRh
m
2t

and the hoop stress is

Note that for a sphere, Rm = Rh and O"m = O"h' For a cylinder, Rm =00 and the hoop
the meridional stress.
Mass moment ofinerlia (MOl) is a measure of a solid's tendency to resist rotational
forces. Rotational inertia depends on mass distribution and varies with the axis of
revolution selected as a reference. The MOl for a solid will always be smallest for an
axis passing through its center of mass· (Fig. 11-39).
s~s is twice

(11-54)

Note the caveats for Eq. (11-53), where R is the radius, t is thickness, and L is the
length of the shell. If O"cr is greater than the material's proportional limit, we must
apply other inelastic buckling methods [NASA, 1975).
If the shell is a pressure vessel with internal pressure, p, the meridional stress is
0"

(11-56)

(11-52)

(11-55)

*For an arbitrary mass with an orthogonal coordinate system (x. y, z) located at its center of
mass, the moment of inertia about, say, the x-axis is

xx =fvolume(l +i)p1V =lmoss(l +<?)dm

MOl

where y and z are the distances from the x axis in the y and z directions to the elemental volume,
dV, and p is the density of the material. Using the parallel axis theorem, the MOl about an axis
parallel to x is

xx + (li + 'i)m

MOl,,'x' = MOl

where ly and lz are the distances from the x to x' axis in the y and z directions.

482

Spa~So~~~

11.6

structures and Mechanisms

11.6

make sure the adhesive bond betw~ the core and face sheets is consis~L See Bruhn
[1973] for detailed ~dwich ~alYSIS. Figure 11-41 shows how sandWIch structure
can be stiffer than skin-only desIgns.

(3)

A

~12cm~

--*- I
T
1 em

m=p(WDH)
MO/AAc

mcp("#L)

~ ~+,.p)

MOlAA

mel'

c ;i(3#+L2)

~4~R3)

MOIAAc~m#

2

MOI BB = MOIAA+m(ID

MOIBBcMOIAA+m(jl

I =8H3/12
= 12x 1/12 = 1

MOl BB c MOIAA + m#

m
Equations for the Mass and Moment of Inertia for Some Common Solids. For
a soUd of uniform density, p, the mass Is the product of P and Volume. We use the
parallel axis theorem to find Inertias at axes B-B. MOlss MOIAA + md2 where dis
the distance from the A-A to B-B axes.

=

Sandwich structure consists of a lightweight, shear-resistant core bonded to outer
lace sheets (Fig. 11-40). A sandwich panel acts like an I-beam. The faces correspond
to the to~ and bottom flanges of the beam and resist in-plane bending. tension. and
compressIOn. The core acts like the I-beam's web and carries shear and out-of-plane
loads. while providing support for the faces.

B

1 r- -1
12cm

T~

3.0 em

~

0.5cm

T
1=64-27=37
I = (12 X 4 3112) - (12x a3/12)

=0.0336 kg/em

m = 0.0365 kg/em

Fig. 11-40. Sandwich Panel with Honeycomb Core. By separating thin face sheets with a
lightweight core, we efficiently increase the bending strength and stiffness of a panel
or shen. Increasing the bending stiffness raises the buckling strength.

12cm

-1

&IwD
I =8H3/12

= 12 X 3.aa3112 = 37

m

=0.1119 kg/em

The deflection. 8. and natural frequencies. f1l1li' of simple beams are shown in
Fig. 11-42 for axial and lateral applied loads [Roark and Young. 1975]. ~en
considering only its first natural. or fundamental frequency. a structure can be Idealized as a single-degree-of-freedom spring-mass system.
The spring is the structure. We can assume an equivalent beam to represent a spacecraft with a natural frequency.

fk
2nV;;

Ssndwlch Panel with Honeycomb Core

r-

FIg. 11-41. Comparison of Sandwich and Monocoque Construction. ThIn face sheets have
lltUe bending stiffness, as indicated by the smaD value of I, (A). The bending stiffness
Is Increased by separating the faces with a low density core, (8). A monocoque wan
thickness of 3.33 cm Is required to obtain bending stiffness equal to the sandwich
panel at three times the mass, (C). The masses per unit thickness shown ara per em
using aluminum with a density of 2,800 kg/m3 and 80 kg/m3 for the face sheets and
honeycomb core, respectively.

11l1li = _1

Face sheet

c

(Core Does Not Contribute)

m 2
MOlccc :

Fig. 11-39.

483

(11-57)

where m is mass and k =stiffness =load/deflection. also called a spring constanL We
find the spring constant, k. using
k=mg

8

(11-58)

where 8 is the deflection and g is acceleration due to gravity.
Face sheets and cores can be of nearly any metallic or composite material. The core
is usually formed into corrugations or honeycomb cells built from thin strips called
ribbons. Core properties are not isotropic. as stiffness in line with ribbons is greater
than transverse stiffness. To maintain the structural integrity of a sandwich, we must

Description of a Typical Spacecraft Structure
Figure" 11-43 shows the Magellan spacecraft configuration and locations of major
subsystems.

spacecraft Subsystems

484

-

r

m

11.6

-

m

-

m

Structures and Mecbanisms

11.6

48S

m

L

Simple

Case A

UnHorm

CaseB

CaseC

CASE A:
lateral Beam

mB =0

Tp=m

3
6 = 0.333( mL
EI ) ng

Complex

CaseD

CaseE

CASEC:
Lateral Beam

mB ",0

Tp =0

3
6=0.125 (m L ) ng

:1

CaseF

CASEE:
Lateral Beam

mB ",0

Tp=m

6=6A +6c
L3
'" EI (0.333m+0.125 mB)ng
Fig. 11-43.

me
~

'nat = 0.276

CASEB:
Axial Beam

mB =0

Tp=m

mL
6=-ng
AE

fnat

'nat = 0.560
"'-

~

fnat

Tp =0

~~ )ng

'nat = 0.276 J

EI
mL3 .+O.236mBL3

CASEF:
Axial Beam

mB ",0
6.=6B +5D ",

~

= 0.250 -

9 = gravitaIIonaJ acceleration
ma = mass of the beam (uniformly dIsIributed)
Tp
tip mass

FJg.11-42.

mBl:.

CASED:
Axial Beam

n = load factor

=

--3

mB ",0

6 = 0.5(

= 0.160 mL

fm!;

mBL

Tp=m

A~(m+0.5mB)ng

'nat =0.160~ mL+O.333m
AE

BL

=

area momentum of inertia of the beam's
cross-seclion
E = the modulus of the eIastIclty
A = cross-secIIonsJ area of the beam

I

Beam Deflections, 'nat,and Natural Frequencies, 6. We can estimate the natural
frequencies and deflections of beams for both axial and lateral or bending loads. In
cases E and F, the values of m and mB are different from previous cases.

The M~gellan structures subsystem consists of the follOwing (excludes cabling and
pyrotechmcs):
• Spacecraft to inertial upper stage (IUS) adapter
• Solid rocket motor module and spacecraft adapter
• Ten-sided bus that houses major elements of the electronics subsystem

Magellan Spacecraft.

• Forward equipment module for radar sensor components
• Solar array support and substrate structure with rotation and deployment
mechanism
• Altimeter radar mounting structure·
• Cover and support structure for radar equipment
• Propulsion module structure
Some of the Magellan structures, such as the IUS and adapters on the propulsion
module, lent themselves to the use of truss or strut members. The truss member design
loads derive from preliminary load factors, the mass distribution, and the vehicle
geometIy. All 12 truss members are graphite-epoxy tubes with machined titanium end
fittings. Four members are 10.2 em in diameter. They were sized as beam-columns to
withstand axial loading and bending while partially supporting solar panels during
launch. The ultimate, equivalent axiaI load is 102,300 N. The other eight members are
8.9 em in diameter and sized for 93,410 N.
The adapter cone for the Solid Rocket Motor is a honeycomb structure that transfers
the motor's thrust loads from 24 equally spaced bolts at the forward end to four large
bolts that attach to the truss for the IUS at the aft end. The forward equipment module
consists of a tubular framework covered with thin shear panels. The frames are welded
2219 aluminum alloy 5.08-cm2 tubing with wall thicknesses varying from 1.27 to
3.81 mm. Numerous equipment boxes are attached to the tubes using threaded fasteners
for easy ~moval. The shear panels enclose the framework except where an equipment
box forms an effective load path. The tube-member sizes result from beam-column
analysis, including transient and acoustic loads.

486

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.6

structures and Mechanisms

11.6

487

11.6.7 An Example Problem
The following example parallels the process for sizing the spacecraft structme and
booster adapter in Table 11-56. Structural size and mass are driven by either strength
or stiffness requirements. We can begin the process by sizing the structme to meet load
requirements and check the resulting natural frequency, or we can begin with a frequency requirement, size the structme, and check strength. Equations are provided to
do either. Most short, heavy spacecraft are strength driven and long, lighter spacecraft
or assemblies are stiffness driven. Any design with very thin skin or stringer sections
can be sensitive to stability failures.
TABLE 11-58.

T

DescrlpUon

Select a structural approach by identifying the type of structure
Chaps. 9, 10,
(monocoque, semlrnonocoque), shape of the structure, and arrangement Sec. 11.62
of components and load paths.

2

Estimate mass dlstnbutlon for all equipment and the structure, including Sec. 11.6.8
the booster adapter.

3

Estimate size and mass of structural members using information from
Chap. 18,
steps (1) and (2) and the axial and bending frequencies for the selected Sec. 11.6.8

4

Apply combined design loads (axial, lateral, and bending) and determine Sec. 11.6.7
member loads.

5

Compute the structural capabOity and compara with the applied loads to Secs.11.6.7,
determine the margin of safety. Iterate the design as required to obtain 11.6.8
the necessary margin of safety.

=2000 kg

ThIckness To Be Determined

1

References

1

Mass

(Evenly DIstrIbuted)

10m

Process for EstImaUng Size and Mass of the Spacecraft Structure.

Step

Example Cylinder:

Fig. 11-44.

StructuralldeallzaUon for the Example Problem. In this problem, we will Idealize
the spacecraft in launch configuration as a cantilevered cyfinder, with all the mass
of the spacecraft uniformly distributed. This Is often it good starting assumption for
lnit/a1 sizing.

booster. Iterate this structural design as required.

TABLE 11-57.
Geometry:

To illustrate the process and some of the more useful analysis methods, we have
shown sizing calculations below for the simple example cylinder in Fig. 11-44. This
trade study compares monocoque (skin only) and skin-stringer designs of the lightest
cylinder that meets representative requirements described in Table 11-57.
Optionl--~onrnooque

Sizing/or Rigidity to Meet the Natural Frequency Requirement
. This cylinder has uniform thickness and, by defmition, no ring or longitudinal stiffeners. Using Eq. (11-57), we will find the minimum shell thickness that
meets the natural frequency requirements. With f TlDt 25 (axial) and 10 (lateral), E
71 x 109 N/m2, mB = 2,000 kg (a weight of 19,614 N or 4,410 lb), and L = 10 m, we
can solve to fmd the required cylinder A and 1.
Axial Rigidity: for axial rigidity, Eq. (11-57) takes the form of
D in Fig. 11-42.

=

=

case

25=0.250~

CyHnder Length

=10 rn

=

Cylinder Diameter 2 m

DIstributed Mass

=2,000 kg

Requirements:
Envelope: Assume the spacecraft fits within a required launch-vehicle-fairing envelope (found
in Table 18-7 or Fig. 18-8). Also assume that satisfying rigidity requirements will keep the

spacecraft's deflection from violating the fairing's dynamic envelope.
Mass: Assume the 2,000 kg Is the total spacecraft mass, including an allocation for structure.
Load Factors: AxIal 2.5 (steady-state) + 4.0 (tranSient) 6.5, Lateral 3.0 (Representative
load factors can be found In Table 18-9.)
Rigidity: The first axial frequency of tha spacecraft must be above 25 Hz. Tha first lateral
(bending) frequency must be above 10 Hz. (See Table 18-9 for typical values.)
Pressure: An internal venting pressure similar to Fig. 18-9 has a maximum value of 6,899 Pa.
Factors of Safety: 125 (ultimate) and 1.10 (yield) according to Option 2 of Table 11-54.

=

Material Properties:

=

=

7075 aluminum Is chosen.

Young's Modulus

E

71 x11)9 N1m2

Poisson's Ratio

V

0.33

Density

p

2.8 x1()3 kglm3

Ultimate Tensile Strength
Yield Tensile Strength

9

AE =0.25 A(71xl0 )
mBL
(2,000)(10)

Example Problem RequIrements.

Ftu

524 x 1OS N1m2

Fty

448 x 1(J6 Nlm2

(11-59)

from which the required A is 28.17 em2 and the required thickness, t, is = 0.045 em.
Lateral Rigidity: here Eq. (11-57) takes the form of case C in Fig. 11-42.

~

9

(71 x 10 )1
10 = 0.560~ mBe = 0.56 (2,000)(10)3

(11-60)

488

Spacecraft Subsystems

1l.6

from which the required cylinder area moment of inertia, 1, is 8.982 x lOS em4 and the
required thickness, t =II(1tR 3) is 0.286 em. The bending mode requirement is much
more critical. For a 0.286-em thickness, the cylinder's cross-sectional area is 180 cm2.

The equatiOn for cylinder buckling stress is
U cr

Applied and equivalent Axial Loads
By multiplying the spacecraft weight by the load factors, we can derive the limit or
maximum expected loads. See Table 11-58 for the example cylinder limit loads.
TABLE 11-58. CylInder Applied Loads.The distance Is measured from the base to the cylinder's
center of mass. Load factors are from Table 11-57.
Weight

Distance

(N)

(m)

Load
Factor

AxIal

19,614

Lateral

19,614

-

3.0

58,840 (N)

Bending Moment

19,614

5

3.0

294,200 (N·m)

Type of Load

6.5

structures and Mechanisms

It.6

= 0.6y ~ = (0.6)(0.379) (71 x 109i.~0.00286)

"=46.16xI06 Nlm 2
Note that if uer were greater than the material's proportional limit, we would use
additional methods for inelastic buckling. With the cylinder's cross-sectional area,
A =180 em2, the critical buckling load is

Per=A Uer= (0.0180)(46.16 x 1()6)

127,500 (N)

. With a bending moment arm of 5 m (the center of mass location is at the cylinder
mtd-Iength), we can find the equivalent axial load using Eq. (11-51):
715900N
'

(11-62a)

or 715,900 x 1.25 =894,900 N.

(11-62b)

Sizing for Tensile Strength
The equation for axial stress, u, is u= PIA. To size the cylinder for tensile strength,
we use the ultimate Peq load 894,900 N, and the material's allowable stress,
Ftu = 524 x 1()6 N/m2, and use A = 21tRt to solve for the required thickness.

=

treq'd= 0.0272 em

(11-64)

Sizing for Stability (Compressive Strength)

n:o

r= 1.0 - 0.901 (1.0 - e~ ) =0.379

MS = 830,900 1.0 = -0.07 (7% negative margin of safety)
894,900
.

(11-70)

Results for a small increase in thickness are shown in Table 11-59.
TABLE 11-59. Summary of Sizing the Monocoque Cylinder for Stability. This tabJe summarizes our initial sizing attempt and the first (and final) iteration for an equivalent
axial load of 894,900 N.
iteration
Initial
FIrst

Thickness
(cm)

Area

r
0.379
0.384

0.286
0.295

Uc:r
46.16 x 10 8
46.27 x 10 8

(cm2)

Pc:r

MS

180.0
186.0

830,900

-0.07
-+0.00

898,000

Internal Pressure .
We can find the hoop stress in the cylinder by using Eq. (11-56) with Rm =00:
Uh = pRh

t

(6,899)(1.0) = 2.34 xl06 N I m 2 (limit)
(0.00295)

(11-71)

= 2.92 x 106 Nlm2 (ultimate)

We must now size the cylinder for stability [Ref. Eqs. (11-52) and (11-53)], using
the cylinder thickness required for bending stability. The cylinder must withstand an
ultimate Peq =894,900 N.

=~
{R =~
-117
16~t 16~o:oo2s6 - .

(11-69)

(11-63)

Although we won't show you here, we must check for yield conditions in the same
way, using a factor of safety of 1.10 with limit load and Fry =448 X 106 Nlm2.

qJ

Allowable Load or Stress 1.0
Design Load or Stress

and must be greater than or equal to zero. For the stability conditions (ultimate),

(11-61)

Limit load x Ultimate Factor of Safety = Ultimate Load

6
(894,900)
524x10 =-----..:..
211: (1.0)t

(11-68)

= 830,900 N (ultimate)
Thus, the cylinder is not adequate because the applied ultimate load is greater than
the critical buckling load. Structural integrity is often shown in terms of the margin of
safety (MS), defined as

LtmItLoad

MS

1! =1!. + 2M =127 500+ (2)(294,200)
eq
axial
R'
1.0

(11-67)

(11-65)
(11-66)

From Eq. (11-55), we see that the meridional (longitudinal) pressure stress is half this
value.
Although these stresses are small, we must combine them with stresses from load
factors when sizing for tensile strength. The pressure and load factors must be timeconsistent (for example, do not combine lift-off loads with venting pressures that occur
later in the ascent). In the case of stability, internal pressure can strengthen a shell. We
can increase the reduction factor, y. slightly to account for the stiffening effect of the
internal pressure. Lateral shear will tend to lower the buckling load

1

, J

,

490

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.6

Calculating the Mass
The mass of the cylinder is the product of the density, p, and volume, 2n R t L.

m = p 2 n R t L = (2.8 x 1(3)(2)(n)(1.0)(O.002 95)(10.0)

(11-72)

=519kg
Any fasteners, attachments.!...and access doors would increase this mass somewhat,
making allowances for material lost in drilled holes and cut outs.

Structures and Mechanisms

11.6

491

It is reasonable to assume that the presence of stiffening stringers and rings in tIlis
design allows us to reduce the skin's thickness. A designer's initial concern with a
thinner skin is buckling; the concern is real and we will indeed check for this mode of
failure. In addition, thin, external surfaces with large surface areas are also susceptible
to the acoustic environment. Acoustically driven loads are based on many factors,
including:
• The launch vehicle's acoustic environment

" Location of the structure within the payload fairing, or shroud

Summary of Monocoque Options

• Whether acoustic blankets are used to help diminish noise within the shroud

The driving requirements for the monocoque cylinder are bending rigidity and
compressive stability, which represent actual design conditions. Please note that the
c~c~ation for first n~ frequency depends on a crude assumption of equally
dIStributed mass. In this examp.le, we want only to illustrate methods and clarify the
need for iterative design. In an actual design, we would know the mass distribution and
use computerized techniques to get a more realistic weight for the structure.
. If we break the cylinder into several assemblies, such as an adapter on the bottom
Wl~ a spacecraft bus on top, we co~d analyze each section separately. For cylinder
section~ closer to the base, Peq loads mcrease. Thus, we would want to analyze different sections for varying types of construction, each with its own applied loads. In this
ex~ple, we could assume that the spacecraft adapter occupies the bottom 2 m of the
cylinder, resulting in a preliminary mass of 519 x 2110 = 103.8 kg.

Option 2-Skin-8trlnger
S~ppose we stiffen the cylinder with 12 longitudinal members, called stringers, and
11 crrcumferential rings, or frames. The cylinder's circumference is 6.28 m, so the
30-deg stringer spacing results in a stringer spacing of 0.5236 m, measured along the
curved surface. The frames separate the cylinder into 10 sections. or bays, each with a
height of 1.0 m. Figure 11-45 identifies the stringers by number.
4

3

t1
til

--or7

Distance from Neutral AxIs
d1 =d7=0
d2 = dB = dB = d12 = 0.50 m
d3=d5=d9=d11 =O.B66m
d4=d10 = 1.00 m

FIg. 11-45.

StrInger Arrangement and Geometry.

• Type of structure (as we said, large and thin surfaces are more affected)

• Whether the structure is an external or internal payload surface
• Boundary conditions of the surface edges
• Whether the surface is flat or curved
• The first resonant frequency of the surface (depends on size, shape, thickness,
material's modulus of elasticity, and edge boundary conditions).
The calculations for acoustic loads are cumbersome; see Sec. 7.7 of Sarafin [1995]
for an example of one technique. We will assume a starting standard gage skin thickness of 0.127 em is adequate against acoustic noise for our design.
First, we must choose whether to design the skin to help sustain load or whether to
allow it to buckle, forcing the stiffeners to take on more of the burden. In this example,
we will design the skin not to buckle, as is usually done when performing preliminary
sizing analysis. Chapter ell of Bruhn [1973] provides details on how to analyze
buckled skin.

Stiffness
Again, let's first size.for stiffness. We already know from calculations for OptioD 1
that we need a skin thickness of 0.045 em to meet the axial frequency requirement of
25 Hz. Therefore, the 0.127-cm-thick skin alone will be adequate for axial rigidity. In
the bending case, the required area moment of inertia, I, of the cylinder's cross-section

is 8.98 x 105 cm4. The skin will satisfy part of this:
Iskin = n R3 t

=n(1.0)3(0.001 27) = 4.00 x lOS cm4

(11-73)

Therefore, the contribution to I from the 12 stringers must equal the remainder.

Istr =8.98 x lOS -4.00 x lOS =4.98 x lOS em4

(11-74)

We can calculate the I of the 12 stringers in the cylinder using the parallel axis tbe. orem, Ixx = 1: (Iem + Atf2). We can ignore the lem' or I about each stringer's center of
mass, because it will be very small compared to its Ad2 term. Therefore, the I of the
stringer system is a function of stringer cross-sectional area, A, and d, the distance
from the cylinder's neutral axis (Table 11-60).
Therefore, Istr = 4.98 x lOS cm4 = A x 60,000 cm2. This results in a required crosssectional ,area of each stringer of 8.32 cm2• The cylinder area combines the s~ and
twelve stringers for a total area of 180.00 em2• Note that both the skin and stringers
must contribute to overall I to meet this requirement. When we allow skin to buckle,

,

492

Spacecraft Subsystems

1l.6

Structures and Mechanisms

11.6

493

!

TABLE 11-60. Calculations for Moment of Inertia Based on StrInger Area.

d

StrInger No.

(cm)

1,7

Skin-StrInger Cylinder Skin Panel Sizing for Stability.

TABLE 11-1i1.

rP

.I'A

(cm)2

0

0

2, 6, 8,12

50

2,500

3,5,9,11
4,10

86.6

7,500

100

2A
4A
4A
2A

10,000

Total

.EArP

Thickness

0

A x 10,000 cm2
A x 30,000 cm2
A x 20,000 cm2
A x 60,000 cm2

we can consider only the stringers and small sections of skin near the stringers, called

2

",f t)2
y2) bt)2 = 0.923.....
\b

krr. E (

= 12(1-

= (0.923)(55)(71

Per
(N)

MS

180.0

381,000

-D.57

180.0

896,400

+0.00

0.127

55"

First

0.195

55

49.8 x 10 6

" The fact that the value of k Is 55 for both the Initial try and first Iteration Is colncfdentaL Note that the values
for kit and Z differ between the two cases.

TABLE 11-62

Skin-StrInger Cylinder Mass Calculation.

(cm)

Part

Equation (11-50) is used to detennine the compressive buckling stress for the skin
panel:

Area
(cm2)

Initial

Thickness

Panel Stability

O"er
(Nlm2)

21.2 X 10 6

effective skin [Bruhn, 1973J.

0"C7

k

(cm)

Iteration

0.195

Skin
Stringers

Area
(cm2)

Leng1h
(m)

Volume

(m3)

Mass
(kg)

122.55

10.0

0.1225

343.0

12 (4.78}=57.4

10.0

0.0574

160.7

Subtotal

503.7

25% Extra for
ring frames and
fasteners

125.9

TOTAL

X109)( 0.00127)2

629.6

0.5236

Skin-Stringer Option Summary
(11-75)
wherek=55 (from Fig. 11-35), y (Poisson's ratio) =0.33, r= 1 m, t= 0.127 em, and
b = 0.5236 m (the spacing between stringers). The buckling load. PeT = O"eT X area =
(21.2 x 1()6) (0.0180 m 2) = 381,000 N. The resulting margin of safety, MS, is

MS= 381,000 -1=-0.57
894,000

(11-76)

The negative margin of safety points out the inadequacy of the design, so we must
add thickness to keep the panel from bUCkling, resulting in the values shown in
Table 11-61. When we increase the thickness like this to prevent panel buckling, we
can decrease the area of the stringers, with the goal of achieving the same total area
and moment of inertia needed for bending stiffness. With a skin thickness of 0.195 cm,
this means the required stringer area is 4.78 cm2.
Table 11-61 summarizes the estimation of mass for the skin-stringer option. using
a mass density of 2.800 kglm3• Note we've included an extra 25% to account for ring
frames. which are needed to stabilize the stringers and fasteners; this is simply an
estimate. Note also that. in a real sizing exercise such as this. we would need to confirm the feasibility of only 4.78 cm2 area for each stringer. To keep a stringer from
buckling as a column between ring frames. we need to design its cross section to have
a relatively large moment of inertia. A common strategy for doing this at low mass is
to use a thin-walled 1- or C-section. However. we might find that. to provide the
needed area moment of inertia with an area of 4.78 cm2• we would need to make the
flanges and webs so thin that they could not carry the design load without buckling
loca1Iy. Chapter 8 of Sarafin [1995J explains how to assess column buckling and local
buckling for thin-walled structural members.

'.

.'

.

Strength and stability determine the structural desIgn. ~I.th diag~nal tensIOn de.
here we allow skin to buckle. we must calculate additional ~triDger and frame
;olid and finite-element modeling is so prevalent in today's mdustry that ,:<>mare im rtant even to the first stage of the design. Still. ",:,e must not
p
tiorpoa th0 rough knowledge of the various modes of fmlure and the limits of
computers

~1~'
':~

s~~tute

our assumptions.
d kin tri
amples We
Cylinder geometry is key in both the monocoque an s -s n~er ex .
ube the length in the equation for bending rigidity, and use th? radius pr~)Jnmen y m
stability. Table 11-63 illustrates the effects .of making the cylinder
d . d gN te that the resized cylinder has the same mtemal volume as the
an WIsoer.
0 t ven'fy that the launch vehicle's shroud can handle the new SIze.
case,
we mus

ti.
s?~

~alculatin

~gmal

.

TABLE 11-63

Geometry (m)
L=10
R=1

Cylinder Sizing Summary.
Option

M

SS
L=9.5
R=1.026

M
SS

StrInger A (cm~

Condition

Sklnt(cm)

Rigidity

0.286

Stability

0.295

Rigidity

0.127

8.32

Stability

0.195

4.78**

Mass (kg)
503
519

630
630

Rigidity

0.227

Stability

0.289

Rigidity

0.127*

5.37

486

Stability

0.209

0.97**

486

*ThIcknesS required to satisfy assumed acoustics environment
'"'StrIngers sized to accommodate bending rigidity requirement
M = Monocoque, SS = SkIn-sIringer

389
495

494

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.6

11.6

Mass decreases with a shorter cylinder, but the stability requirement becomes more
critical as the radius increases. More iterations with a shorter cylinder and additional
stringers would be appropriate. A more massive example would make the skin-stringer
design more attractive.

structures and Mechanisms

495

PrImoMovar

(Gearhead MoIDr>

/\

11.6.8 Mechanisms and Deployables
Aerospace mechanisms can be divided into high- and low-cyclic applications. The
former, such as antenna gimbals or solar array drives, require frequent or constant
articulation. The latter restrain a payload on launch or retrieval, or they propel the
payload to the deployed or restored position. Figures 11-46 and 11-47 show examples
of these mechanisms. The design is complete only when principles of mechanics and
environmental considerations lead to a producible and testable spacecraft. The most
challenging requirements for mechanisms are those that demand precision pointing
and a long operating life.

Torque MuI!IpIIer
(BaD Screw)

FIg. 11-47.

FIg. 11-46.

High-cycilc Mechanism, Rotary Actuator Assembly and Components. An
example of an aerospace mechanism requiring precision pointing (motor driven).

Requirements. Typical spacecraft requirements for aerospace mechanisms are as
follows:
• High-cyclic mechanisms
-Antenna pointing and tracking
-Solar array pointing and
tracking
-Attitude control reaction
wheels
-Boom extensions

• Low-cyclic mechanisms
- Antenna launch retention
- Antenna deployment
- Solar array retention
- Solar array deployment
- Contamination cover removal
- Spacecraftllaunch vehicle separation

Low-cycJlc Mechanism, Solar Array Retention Mechanism. An example of an
aerospace appendage retention mechanism.

The MIL-A-83577 [1988] specification for moving mechanical assemblies gives us
important technical guidance. The functional requirements for the mechanisms derive
from mission requirements and resolve into torques or forces and operating rates. An
operating rate profile, as shown in Fig. 11-48, establishes the payload articulation or
deployment rate. This profile determines the maximum angular acceleration, a. Once
we have determined the payload moment of inertia, MOl, we can compile the mechanism's operating torque, T =a (MOl). For rough torque sizing, we can add a 20%
friction torque to the operating torque. The constant-speed part (sz) of the operating
rate profile, represents the mechanism operating torque because there is no acceleration during this phase. With the two operating points known, we can generate a
torque-speed curve (see Fig. 11-49). This linear curve establishes the stall torque and
theoretical no-load speed for the mechanism. When these mechanism-performance
characteristics are arithmetically manipulated by the mechanical advantage of a gear
train, the new performance characteristics represent the principal motor requirements.
With the mechanism's stall torque now known, we can do first-order approximations
of the mechanism parameters using Fig. 11-50.
As an example, a solar array with moment of inertia, MOl, must be deployed by
rotating from a stowed position to a locked position in time, t. This time period involves
accelerating the array to a maximum rate, sl' then decelerating to the lock. Therefore,
the operating torque (operating point 1) equals moment of inertia, MOl, times acceleration (sl +t/2). In the absence of other running friction data, we can assume operating
point 2 is 20% of operating point 1. Extrapolating to a stall torque (assume 200 N-m)
lets us use Fig. 11-50. If the mechanism had a 200 N'm stall torque, we can see thirt the
mechanism mass will be about 18 kg, require 90 W of power, and have a volume of
about 7,800 em3• As a guideline, mechanisms should have a 100% torque margin to
provide for uncertainties of friction, payload inertia growth, and thermal effects.

496

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.6

Torque"

Deceleration

O

~------~~~~~

O~____~____~____~

tI2

"Resulting from constant current applied

"Resulting from constant current applied

to motor.

Fig. 11-48.

to motor.
Typical Operating Rate Profiles and Derfved Accelerations. The acceleration is
calculated by dividing speed by the time Increment

.....- No-Load Speed

11.7

Guidance and Navigation

497

Although weight. power, and volume are usually the three major spacecraft system
parameters, we must not severely constrain the mechanism's weight. The mechanism
design should be robust to withstand stall torques and to maintain its structural
stiffness over a wide range of temperatures. The mechanism is not a major power consumer. Low-cyclic mechanisms operate only a few times in the mission. High-cyclic
mechanisms draw high currents during the acceleration phase of the duty cycle, a
phase that is generally 10% of its operating life. Volume constraints will dictate the
design process. Also, requirements for mechanical and electrical interfaces will influence the mechanism's volume and structure. The mechanism will also produce its
own requirements for torques or forces, operating rates, structural stiffness, operating
life and histogram (torque/cycle matrix), and environments. The mechanism muSt
withstand the launch and derived vibration tests, which will influence the strength and
stiffness requirements. The mechanism must operate in orbit. where the thermalvacuum environment will influence the selection of materials, lubricants, and coatings.1t will also create thermally induced loads caused by difference in coefficients of
thermal expansion of selected structural materials.
For more information on space mechanisms, see Conley [1998], Sarafin [1995],
and MiI-A-83577 [1988],

11.7 Guidance and Navigation
Output
Speed

I
I

James R. Wertz, Microcosm, Inc.

_.1 ___ _
I
I

/Stall Torque

o
Output Torque

Fig. 11-49.

Derlv~on of Mechanism Stall Torque. Unear extrapolation of operating points
establishes stall torque and no-load speed.

19,800

54

30

r---,----.,-----,.-----.

240

16,500

45

25

t----t----+---::::::J.-===::::;!

200

13,200

36

20 t----t---::::;;-"f=~---+~~:.fQl~

160

9,900

27

15 t---::;;:,.......,r-'----+--:;;;::::I;:::2:=-:!......:::::::::.....OOlmj

120

6,600

18

10 r----t---::;;;;i~~-==-----+-----I

eo

3,300

9

r-:::::;;;;:;ooo......,,:f----+-----1------1

40

o

1

0

~

I

5

O!;-------:'::------::~---..l..---_.J
~ 0
100
200
300
400

!.
~

o

StalITorque (N-m)

Fig. 11-50. Actuator Characteristics Based on Stall Torque Requirements. Empirical data
based on wide range of aerospace mechanisms.

We use navigation" and orbit determination interchangeably to mean determining
the satellite's position and velocity or, equivalently, its orbital elements as a function
of time. Similarly, we use both guidance and orbit control to mean adjusting the orbit
to meet some predetermined conditions. For satellites, orbit control has two important
subsets. Orbit maintenance refers to maintaining the orbital elements but not the timing of when the satellite is at a particular location in the orbit. Stationkeeping refers to
maintaining the satellite within a predefined box, which includes maintaining both the
in-track position and the other orbital elements. Altitude maintenance is an example of
orbit maintenance in which occasional thruster firings are used to overcome drag and
keep the orbit from spiraling downward. Geosynchronous stationkeeping maintains
the satellite in a box over one place on the Earth. Stationkeeping in low-Earth orbit
includes constellation maintenance, in which each satellite is maintained in a moving
box defined relative to the rest of the satellites in the constellation.
The satellite ephemeris is a tabular listing of the position and possibly the velocity
as 11 function of time, usually in electronic form. It is important to distinguish the
satellite ephemeris from the solar ephemeris, which lists the relative positions of the
• The origin of the terminology causes some confusion, particularly when reading older sources
or references not associated with satellites. Navigation traditionally refeaed to determining
how to get a craft where we wanted it to go. The term guidaru;e was introduced with rockets
and missiles to mean computing the steering commands needed to make the rocket go where
we wanted it to (thus, a guided missile); control meant carrying out these steering commands
to adjust the vehicle's direction of flight Thus, an intercept missile would have a guidance
and control (G&C) system, and a space plane or interplanetmy spacecraft would have a guidance, navigation. and control (GN&C) system. However, for spacecraft we use navigation to
mean orbit detenilination, guidance to mean orbit control, and control system as a shortened
form of attitude control system.

"

,.
. !

498

Spacecraft Subsystems

lL7

Earth and Sun as the Earth travels in its orbit, and lunar and planetary ephemerides
which provide similar data for other bodies in the solar system.
.
'
There are two types of orbit determination, differentiated by timing. Real-time orbit
determination provides the best estimate of where a satellite is at the present time and
may be important for spacecraft and payload operations, such as accurate pointing at
some target DefoUtive orbit determination is the best estimate of the satellite position
and orbital elements at some earlier time. It is done after gathering and processing all
relevant observations. Orbit propagation refers to integrating the equations of motion
to determine where a satellite will be at some other time. Usually orbit propagation
refers to looking ahead in time from when the data was taken and is used either for
planning or operations. Occasionally orbits will be propagated backward in time,
either to determine where a satellite was in the past or to look at historical astronomical
observations in the case of comets or planets.
Traditionally, ground stations from around the world pmvide tracking data to a
mission-operations center. When all data is available, definitive orbit determination
provides the best estimate of the orbit This is used to process the payload data for
science or observation missions. The best estimate of the orbit is then propagated
forward for real-time operations (such as star cata10g selection or maneuver timing)
and further forward for mission planning.
In 1983 NASA launched the first Tracking omJ Data Relay Satellite, TDRS, to
begin replacing the worldwide ground tracking network." IDRS provides the same
functions as the traditional ground-station network. As the name implies, it tracks lowEarth orbiting satellites and relays data between the satellite and the IDRS ground
station in White Sands, NM. As described in Sec. 11.72, GPS, GLONASS, and other
more autonomous systems are also becoming operational, so orbit determination for
future systems will differ significantly from what it has been in the past.
We can think of orbit determination and control as analogous to attitude determination and control. The ADCS subsystem (Sec. 11.1) measures and maintains the
spacecraft's orientation about its center of mass. Similarly, the guidance and navigation function, perhaps better thought of as the Orbit Determination omJ Control
Subsystem, or OOCS, measures and maintains the position of the spacecraft's center
of mass. Both systems deal with spacecraft dynamics and both have the multiple functions of acquisition, determination, maintenance, and maneuver control.

11.7.1 System Definition Process

Guidance and Navigation

11.7

rincipaI alternatives for navigation sy~tems, ~d Sec. 11.~.3 descnbes. the alternatives
for maintaining and controlling the orbIt The mplementatton of these m hardware and
software is discussed in Sec. 11.7.4
TABLE 11-64.

Process for Defining the Guidance and Navigation Subsystem. See text for
discussion of each step.

capability to perform autonomous orbit maintenance and control, so the orbit determination and control function will change significantly. Even if we ultimately choose a
completely traditional approach, we should evaluate new techniques which may
reduce cost and risk for a particular space mission.
Table 11-64 summarizes the process of derming the orbit determination and control
function. Each of the steps is descnDed below. Section 11.7.2 then discusses the
• The second TDRS was lost in the Challenger accident in 1986, so the two-satellite operational
constellation was not complete until 1988.

Where
Discussed

Step

Principal Issues

1. Define navigation and orbit-related
top-level functions and
requirements

Mapping and pointing
ScheduUng
Constellation or orbit maintenance
Rendezvous or destination requirements

2. Do pointing and mapping trades to
determine preUminary navigation
(position) accuracy requirements

What payload functions win the navigation SeC. 5.4
data be used for?
Payload data processing (mapping)
Payload pointing

3. Determine whether orbit control
or maintenance is needed

Geosynchronous stationkeeplng
Constellation stationkeeplng
Altitude maintenance
Maintaining orbit elements
Mid-course corrections

4. If yes, do trade on autonomous
vs. ground-based orbit control

Is reduced operations cost and risk worth Sees.
introducing a nontraditional approach?
2.1.2,
11.7.1,
11.7.3

5. Determine where navigation data
Is needed

Is It needed only at ground station for
Sec. 2.1.1
mission planning and data evaluation?
Is It needed on board (orbit maintenance,
Sun vector determination, payload
pointing, target selection)?
Is navigation (or target location) data
needed by several end users who may get
information directly from the spacecraft?

6. Do autonomous vs. ground-based
navigation trade

Does reduced operations cost and risk
Sees.
justify a nontraditional approach?
2.1.1,
Is there a need for real-time navigation . 11.7.1
data?

Major changes are occurring in the guidance and navigation arena. Traditionally,

this has been exclusively a ground-operations activity. However, with the introduction
of GPS and advanced onboard computers, several options now exist for autonomous
navigation-determining the orbit on board the satellite in real time. We also have the

499

Secs.1.4,
2.1,4.2,
7.1

Chap. 7,
Sec. 11.7.3

7. Select navigation method

See Sec. 11.7.2 for main options

8. Define G&N system requirements

Top-level requirements should be in terms Sees.
of what is needed (mapping, pointing,
11.7.1,
constellation maintenance, level of
11.7.4
autonomy), not how the mission is done

Sec. 11.7.2

Step 1. Define top-levelfunctions. We want to determine the key mission objectives which require either navigation information or orbit maintenance and control.
Typically, we think of maintaining the satellite in a specialized .orbit ~ver the 1if~ of
the mission. Examples include a geostationary sl~t, Lagran.ge J?OlDl orbIt,. or ~g,
ground track orbit. We may also need stationkeeplDg to mamtam the relative POSItions

500

Spaceeraft Subsystems

11.7

between spacecraft in a constellation. Orbit control, but not orbit maintenance, is
needed to reach a particular destination such as rendezvous with another spacecraft,
landing on the Moon, or insertion into a particular geosynchronous slot.
Navigation has two basic pmposes. It allows us to maintain and control the orbit,
just as attitude determination is used for attitude control. Thus, any requirement for
orbit control will ordinarily result in a corresponding requirement for navigation. We
may also need navigation information to process data from the payload. Although
some science missions may actuallY,use position data (e.g., mapping of the magnetic
field or particle flux density), it is usually only part of payload pointing and mapping.
Irrespective of any orbit control, we often need to point an antenna or instrument at
some location or to define where an instrument is looking on the surface of the Earth.
Typically, this results in a more stringent navigation requirement than for purely
operational pmposes.
Step 2. Do pointing and mapping trades. Because these are typically the most
stringent requirements, we must do the pointing and mapping trades described in
Sec. 5.4 to obtain a preliminary estimate of the needed accuracy. In most cases, the
pointing and mapping requirement can be met by trading between navigation and attitude accuracy (see Fig. 4-6), so navigation trades will frequently need to be perfonned
in conjunction with attitude trades.
Step 3. Determine need for orbit control. At the system level, we must decide
whether we need to maintain or control the orbit. If we don't, we may be able to save
money and weight by eliminating the propulsion subsystem. But if we need a propulsion system anyway, this hardware can often easily handle orbit maintenance and
control. At the same time, maintaining the orbit may significantly extend the mission
life and thereby reduce the cost per year.
Step 4. Do autonomous orbit control trade. If we must control the orbit, then we
need to determine whether to do so from the ground or autonomously on board the
spacecraft. Traditionally, the ground station has controlled the orbit. In most cases, this
remains the best approach if the orbit control activity is nonrecurring and communications with the satellite are straightforward, as in the case of transfer to
geosynchronous orbit. Here, orbit control needs are well defined, traditional ground
techniques are available, and it is needed only once during the mission. Thus, an
autonomous, onboard system would probably cost more than we would save from
lower operations expenses. However, autonomous orbit maintenance and control can
reduce life-cycle cost and risk for many missions (see Sec. 11.7.3). Over the next
decade, I expect it to become as common as autonomous attitude control is on today's
spacecraft.
Step S. Determine where navigation data is needed. Section 2.1.1 describes how
to do a data flow analysis to detennine where data comes from and where it is needed.
If we choose not to design the system to minimize communications and data flow, our
decision must be justifiable. For example, we may choose to avoid the nonrecurring
cost of putting the processing where it would be most efficient. An extreme would be
a small LightSat with a single ground station which performs all of the data evaluation,
system control, and mission planning. In this case, it is probably easiest to do the
navigation on a small computer at the ground station. At the other extreme would be a
satellite communicating with many distributed users, each of whom needs to know
either the satellite position or derivative information such as the ground look-point
location. In this case, the navigation data is probably needed on board the spacecraft,
although we could navigate from the ground and uplink the results. The third possible

11.7

501 '

Guidance and Navigation

f navigation data is by the spacecraft itself for payload functions such as pointing
use; et selection and for real-time identification. We can also use navigation data for
or c!rart control functions such as orbit maintenance, star catal~g selection, ~r d~ter­
~ ·ng where the Sun is relative to the spacecraft for accurate attitude detemunati~n.
lD1~tep 6. Do autonomous vs. ground-based ~vigation trad~. ~e ~ust determ.me
whether reducing the long-term, recurring operations cost and n~k J~stifies .the co~t of
autonomous navigation. Tradition strongly supports ground naVIgation. ThIS proV1~es
a greater level of comfort to some customers and end users wh.o are conc~ed. pnmarily that there be no deviation from prior ~oced~es. Irrespectiv~ ?f techD1c~ ISSUes,
there is a level of programmatic risk asSOCIated WIth any nontraditional solution. The
. ue of autonomous navigation clearly
falls
in this area, although semi-autonomous
ISS
•
•.
navigation, such as TDRS and GPS, IS gatD1~g accep!an~e.
.
A key question is whether we need real-~me na~g~tIon data, eIther on ~d the
satellite or for the end user. If we must prOVIde naVIgation and payl~ad data sImultaeously autonomous navigation is highly desirable. The alternative would be to
~avigat~ on the ground and uplink the solution~ for use by th~ sp.acecra~ .or to send
them to the end user. This approach makes relIable commuDlcations cntical. If ~e
ork is done on the ground, then there are two possibilities. It can be done either m
time using real-time data from the spacecraft, or it can be done using older data
~bich is 'propagated forward to produce a real~time ephemeris. In the past we used
older data because real-time data was not avaIlable. TDRS, G~S, GLONA~S, and
various autonomous navigation systems now allow us to use real-time data whIch does
not need to be as accurate as data for propagated solutions..
.
Step 7. Select a navigation meth~d. Section 11.7.2 ~ummanzes the alternatIve
spacecraft navigation methods and therr ad~antages and dI~dv.antages.
Step 8. Define requirements for the guidance ~nd navIgation-system. e .should
define the top-level requirements in tenns of wh~t IS needed r~ther ~an ho.w ~t IS to be
done. Thus, requirements should be expressed m tenns of mappmg, .pomtin~, c?nstellation maintenance, and level of autonomy rather than the specIfic navIga~on
method to be used. While we will go through detailed trades to select the best navIg~­
tion method we should focus on mission objectives to define requirements. ThIS
allows later ~ades which may either be more detailed or use new information.

':aI

W.

11.7.2 Orbit Determination Systems
There are three elements to the orbit detennination problem: (I) the source and ~
of data, (2) the algorithms for modeling the orbi~, and (3) the computer progr~ whIch
processes the observations. The second and thrrd elements are w~ll establIshed and
will be described only briefly here. I will concentrate on the alternatIve sources of data
and the advantages and disadvantages of each in an orbit detennination system.
The analytical methods for orbit detenninati~n are co~plex ~u~ well understood.
They are summarized briefly in Chap. 6 and dISCUSsed m detaIl m several modern
reference works. Vallado [2001], Battin [1999], Chobotov [1991], Escobal [19~5],
Noton [1998], and Roy [1991] provide extensive discussions of orbit detennination
and orbit propagation methods.
....
.
Generally the various algorithms used for orbIt determmation are Implemented m
a small number of large and complex software systems. The major orbit detennin.ation
systems are used for multiple space programs. Perhaps the most frequently used IS the
Goddard Trajectory Determination System, GTDS, used by NASA to process data for
nearly all low-Earth orbit satellites [Long et a1.,1989]. NORAD and others use a

502

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.7

similar system for tracking spacecraft based on radar observations JPL's D
S
Network (DSN) uses a uniq~e and remarkably accurate system to ~k int~ian~:;
spa~ [Jordan, 1981; Miller et al., 1990). It solves simultaneously for the orbits of
th~ l~terplane~ probes and the planets and satellites which they approach. For many
~on ~alYSIS purposes, Chap. 6 (or any book on astrodynamics) contains sufficient
tnformation to constru~t an elementary orbit propagator. Highly precise orbit propaga-

tors are now commerctally available.
The ob~ations used for orbit determination can be obtained by tracking from the
ground, tracking from space, or from autonomous or semi-autonomous systems on the
sp~ Each of these approaches is described below. Table 11-65 summarizes
thetr relative advantages and disadvantages.
TABLE 11-65.
System

Advantages and Disadvantages of Alternative Navigation Methods. (See
also Table 11-66.)
Advantages

Disadvantages

Ground
Tracking

Traditional approach
Methods and tools weD estabfished

TORS
Tracking

Standard method for NASA spacecraft Not autonomous
High accuracy
Available mostly for NASA missions
Requires TORS tracking antenna
Same hardware for tracking and
detalinks

Global
Positioning
System
(GPS);
GLONASS

High accuracy
Provides time signal as wen as
position

Semi-autonomous
Depends on long-term maintenance
and structure of GPS
Orbit only (see text for discussion)
Must initialize some units

Microcosm
Autonomous
Navigation
System
(MANS)

FuOy autonomous
Uses attitude-sensing hardware
Provides orbit, attitude, ground
look-point, and direction to Sun

Rrst flight test in 1993
Initialization and convergence speeds
depend on geometry

Space
Sextant

Could be fully autOnomous

Right-tested prototype onlynot a current production product
Relatively heavy and high power

Stellar
Refraction

Could be fuDy autonomous
Uses attitude-sensing hardware

StUI In concept and test stage

Landmark
Tracklng

Can use data from observation payload StIli in concept stage
sensor
Landmark identification may be difficult
May have geometrical singularities

Satellite
Crosslinks

Can use crossfink hardware already
on the spacecraft for other purposes

Earth and
Earth and stars available nearly
Star Sensing
continuously in vicinity of Earth

Accuracy depends on ground-station
coverage
Can be operations Intensive

Unique to each consteDation
No absolute position reference
Potential problems with system
deployment and spacecraft failures

Cost and complexity of star sensors
Potential difficulty identifying stars

11.7

Guidance and Navigation

503

Ground-Station Tracking
This is the traditional way to obtain data for orbit determination. We either track the
spacecraft's telemetry signals or use radar tracking from a site not associated with the
spacecraft. In both cases, the principal data used for orbit determination are range and
range rate-that is, the distance from the ground station to. the satellite and the
satellite's line-of-sight velocity during the overhead pass. Angular measurements are
also available at times but are typically far less accurate than range or range-rate
measurements.
Accurate orbit determination using ground-station data ordinarily requires a
number of passes. We may accumulate data from multiple passes over a single ground
station, or may receive data at a central location from multiple ground stations around
the world. In either case, data from a number of passes goes to one place for processing
through a large system such as GTDS, described above. Ground-based systems necessarily operate on historical data and therefore will use propagated orbits for real-time
operations and mission planning. Accuracies achievable with ground-based tracking
vary with a spacecraft's orbit and the accuracy and amount of data. However, 3a
accuracies typically range from several kilometers for low-Earth orbits to approximately 50 km for geosynchronous orbit.

TDRS
The Tracking and Data Relay Satellite, TDRS, has now replaced NASA's world':'
wide ground-tracking network. A major advantage of this system is that the two
operational TDRS satellites can provide tracking data coverage for 85% to 100% of
most low-Earth orbits. (TDRS does not work for satellites in geosynchronous orbit.)
The system collects mostly range and range-rate data from the TDRS satellite to the
satellite being tracked. Angular information is available, but is much less accurate than
the range and range-rate data. If atmospheric drag effects on a satellite are small,
TDRS can achieve 30 accuracies of about 50 m. This is considerably better than most
ground-tracking systems. Another way to track from space is to use satellite-tosatellite or crosslink tracking as described below.

Spacecraft Autonomous Navigation
As summarized in Table 11-66, manufacturers have developed a number of autonomous navigation systems for spacecraft. Determining the orbit on board is technically
easy with the advent of advanced spacecraft computers and higher-order languages.
The principal problem is to provide orbit determination that is reliable, robust. and
economical in terms of both cost and weight. A number of systems which can do this
now exist-autonomous orbit determination is clearly feasible but becoming less
important with the increasing use of GPS for navigation in low-Earth orbit. Wertz
[2001] and Chory et ru. [1986) describe alternative methods of autonomous navigation"
on board satellites. Table 11-65, earlier in the section, gives the advantages and disadvantages of the primary alternatives.
Autonomous navigation is inherently real-time. Thus, definitive orbit solutions and
payload data are available simultaneously, which means that we can generate ground
look-points or target positions and immediately associate them with the payload data.
In addition, measurements can be less accurate than those for systetns that work on old
data, because solutions propagated forward in time lose accuracy. For example, to do
accurate orbit maneuvers without autonomous navigation, we need a greater accuracy
from a definitive solution based on old data that must be propagated forward to meet

Spacecraft Subsystems

504

.

Ii!
:I
ti

~c

I
II:

~

i

iii
>.~

0

.. =
ti
as.e
~ll= ~~...
=~ li2 ~ !~~
:s!i
i §:J:::J -alQ) :::Jc
o~ ... ~~ ~E= 8=
~0E
... ;::.

~~Sa
O~(I).5

S

C liS

:I.5~'iij'

01

~

"O~

~& ~
c0

2 if!
g@ ~ i~
..JC!l:::J'Q.o

I!c

U! ~

0

1)

2
00
WW
..JC!l

EOI

E

8~ -

ij'~ 8
D.I!

.... 0
~w
1t)..J
.... .5

Ic
~

r:'€"O
g~ic E
o..J~§8

~c§en~

0

It)

C\I

!

go
"CW
Q...J
~

:::J"O
=
GiS

'Q.>,
gil
"Cc
D.o
.5a
:li~

....

Q)

0 ....... ""'

2~~

8~i

~
a;

a;

D.
go
"CW
Q...J

1!!1D

It)

="0

~i
i~i~ 0(;-coc
jOCQ)
:ml-e ~I!!
clD.c

a:!!E§ :a ... j
... g'!!!:e =.!a;
&=~ ~ .5.9>
0.2D.D.
0.c1ll

-Q)e

~0

illQ)

=ll~

~

D.
go
if~

~

o S
- -Q)111
ogi€
~C!l'Q.o

E

~

~;

e~

~E
CDoE
en:;;:

~;f5

"0
i CD
:t:!"g

~

51 01 E

0

19
O..J

~.5

~

8c
0;; ~ §
::j§~:g
€ e8.~
011101
"0

S 11::

€
0

"0c
CD
111"0
:t:!:::J
€O~

.5

(I) a;

iS

a!

c
0

iS

.Et')

8.

0

~m

.E
.9

i

S(I).a

§~

!-~

.a
061

118
.!!!~
01"0
:ii

u:

u. ....

C

0

I

e

'Oc
08

~ l
ID a

~:l

o:t:!
!'ill
~i

E

Q)
lD 11 Q) "0

0:!!Q)
~ i)

E E
0
C
~aI
..!..
E
Q)
en

:I

GPS and GLONASS
The Global Positioning System, also called GPS or Navstar, is a system of
navigation satellites funded by the U.S. Department of Defense and intended explicitly
to allow position determination by very small receivers anywhere on or near the
Earth's surface. Extensive discussions of GPS and its applications, including signal
structure and processing algorithms, are provided by Parkinson and Spilker [1996],
Leick [1995], Kaplan [1996], and Hofmann-Wellenhof[1997]. GPS receivers are now
readily available and their use is becoming widespread in airplanes, ships, ground
vehicles, and military equipment. The system provides a moderate accuracy signal
(50 m-l00 m) for general navigation and a high-accuracy coded signal (15 m) for
military applications. Commercial GPS receivers are now available for spacecraft; and
are gaining in popularity in low-Earth orbit [Wertz, 2001; Chory et aI., 1986; Anthony,
1992; Parkinson and Gilbert, 1983; Porter and Hite, 1984].
GPS receivers use signals from four different GPS satellites to solve simultaneously for the three components of the observer's position and the time. This can be
done several times, providing position and velocity data which determines the orbit
elements. The GPS constellation is in a 12 hour orbit at approximately halfgeosynchronous altitude. Because the GPS antennas are designed to provide signals
only in a cone covering the Earth's surface, coverage drops off rapidly with altitude,
even for satellites in low-Earth orbit [Wertz, 1999]. Nonetheless, both analytic and
experimental studies have been done on using GPS for navigation in orbits as high as
geosynchronous using the spillover of the beam beyond the edge of the Earth· s disk
[Chao, et al., 1992].
The GPS signal can also be used to solve for the attitude of the vehicle on which
the receiver is located. This is done by using multiple GPS antennas which are a
known distance apart and which are attached to a rigid element of the vehicle. By measuring the phase difference between the signal from one GPS satellite arriving at two
antennas, the GPS receiver serves as an interferometer measuring the angle between
the line of sight to the GPS satellite and the line joining the two antennas. The
wavelength of the GPS carrier signal is about 20 cm. Therefore, the accuracy of the
attitude is limited by both the long wavelength and multi-path effects which cause confusion in the identification of the signal coming directly from the GPS satellite. In
practice, spacecraft have been able to achieve on-orbit attitude accuracies on the order
of 0.3 to 0.5 deg.
A number of practical difficulties have prevented GPS receivers from developing
substantial operational utility in space for attitude determination. One problem is that
multi-path effects can cause difficulties in some geometries and the GPS constellation,
by nature, will eventually present most geometrical circumstances to the spacecraft.
Orbit determination is an activity which can be done intermittently without harming
system performance, but attitude determination must be continuous if-we are to avoid
a major failure. Consequently, the potential lack of availability of four GPS satellites
for even a short period due to either geometrical circumstances or the outage of one or
more satellites is a major concern for a spacecraft which depends on GPS for attitude
determination. Thus, GPS-based attitude sensors will probably serve principally as
backup, or would require backup systems to prevent major anomalies.

oS!
~

0
~Q) :::J0

!

~

"0

.:

........

505

planning.

i

~

~

~

Guidance and Navigation

c

:eaI

.!i
== e
~

~:I

11.7

real-time needs. With real-time systems, highly accurate orbit propagation is less
critical, although we will still need some forward propagation for prediction and

II

C'J

11.7

cE
i=

ii
IB c-

...

9l'
!II
a::
g>0
..... E5

~~~

(!lilt/)

=1
€

0111

€i!!

Oas

"0
a-2j
:t:!:::J
€ij
0111

€
0

~ c:!!
Ii!
"C
88
c
- :::J CD ~aI
ti§~g "0
'ge§
S!:::Jlij
&. 01"0 8. CD "0 ~ ("OcQ)
:lEc D.
o~s
"'0(1)
Q.(I)S £~8§ £1l~! Q.e

lll~

.ECD
.9=

ia

-:I
oe~

sc

CD
E

I!!

I~

c= CD EE
~ cD.
Cl.c

~!~

Ii

£ D.~ :~

8

~!~
CDEU;

o~!<:

~

~
c'1

s
cI

c

~
~~
SCD

t/)Q:

i!:

I\I~

.§:g
~~

"C

ac
cOIl!! CD
e:::J:t:!
;=
"OCDt§ 'B2~
a; ... ~
~~a;
CD-CD~
01
01
=
B§:e
iioc
1I:~2g

C

a
§~lllE~

1!~j ~~~
e
~

"0

.e!

~:§

~~
S

&110

t~CD

o~~

~

"0

lag>
'€~

1fIc'1

.

506

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.7

The global navigation satellite system, GWNASS, is a Russian space-based
navigation system that provides 3-D position, velocity determination and time dissemination on a worldwide basis. GLONASS is very similar to GPS. It consists of a
24 satellite constellation at approximately half geosynchronous altitude and provides
accuracies very similar to those of GPS. There are a number of mannfactmers of
GLONASS receivers, some of which are combined GPS/GLONASS receivers.
GLONASS is operated by Russia's Ministry of Defense. Like GPS, it was initiated
in the mid-l9708 with military design goals. Also like GPS, the civilian applications
became apparent rapidly and the system is now in use for both civilian and military
purposes. While the end results are very similar, the GLONASS signal structure is
significantly different than that of GPS. Both GLONASS and GPS are available for
use by spacecraft, and many satellite mannfactmers are considering the use of either
or both systems for onboard determination of position, velocity, time, and sometimes
attitude. For further information on GLONASS, see, for example, Leick [1995] and
Kaplan [1996].

Space Sextant
The Space Sextant was developed and flight tested in the late 19708 as a means of
autonomous navigation by accurately measuring the angle between a star and the limb
of the Moon [Martin Marietta Aerospace, 1977; Booker, 1978]. The Space Sextant
provides both orbit and attitude information and can work over a very large regime,
including geosynchronous oroit. The Space Sextant unit has been flight qualified;
however, the need for precise telescope measurements makes the instrument rather
heavy and therefore limits its usefulness in many space applications.

Microcosm Autonomous Navigation System
The Microcosm Autonomous Navigation System (MANS) uses observations of the
Earth. Sun, and Moon from a single sensor to provide real-time position and attitude
data rrai and Noerdlinger, 1989; Anthony, 1992]. These objects were chosen principally because they can be unambiguously identified with high reliability and low cost
and observations can be done with minor modifications to attitude sensors already on
most spacecraft. The MANS flight software can also make use of, but does not require,
data from a GPS receiver, star sensors, gyros, and accelerometers. The addition of
other data sources provides added accuracy but is not required by the system. In addition to orbit and attitude, MANS provides ground look point and Sun direction
information (even when the Sun is not visible to the sensor). It can work at any attitude
and any orbit from LEO to beyond GEO. MANS was flight tested on the TAOS
mission launched in 1994 [Hosken and Wertz, 1995].

Stellar-Horizon Systems
A number of approaches for omit and attitude determination have been proposed,
based on the interaction of starlight with the Earth's atmosphere [Hummel, 1984].
Specifically, as stars approach the edge of the Earth as seen from the spacecraft,
refraction will cause their position relative to other stars to shift, producing an effect
which can be measured with considerable accuracy. Theoretical accuracies for such
systems are projected to be in the vicinity of 100m. However, none of these systems
has been fully developed for flight as yet.

Satellite Crosslinks
A number of proposals have been made for using satellite crosslinks to provide
orbit determination [Chory et al., 1984]. This is of interest because it can be done with

11.7

Guidance and Navigation

507

crosslink equipment used for intersatellite communication, and, therefore, requires
minimal additional hardware. Crosslink tracking has been proposed fo~ a number of
constellations, but tends not to be implemen~ beca~ of several practi<:al prob~~s.
One problem is .that satellite-t~satellit~ tracking ~vldes only the rel~ve POSitiOns
of the satellites m the constellatton. Th1S means that If ~e absolute pOS1~?n IS needed
for any purpose such as mission planning or data reductton, then an addlbonal system
must be provided to establish the oroit relative to the ~'s surface.. A ~nd
problem. is that the satellites become interdependent, so satelbte-t~satelbte tracI?ng
may not work well for the first satellites or may d~grade if a ~telhte ~to~ worl~ing.
Therefore, an alternative system not based on sat~llite-to-satelhte tracking IS req~.
If additional systems must be provided, there IS less benefit from the satelbte-tosatellite tracking.

Landmark Tracking

Landmark tracking has also been proposed for orbit determination [Markl~y,
1981]. This has been established as feasible by using data returned .from ~!bte
payloads. However, it has not been ~ as a norm~ method
sat<:lbte ?aV1~atJon,
due in part to the difficulty of estabIishmg automattc, un.am~lguo~s Idenbficabon of
landmarks to ensure that tracking accuracy can be mamtained m the presence of
adverse weather or poor seeing conditions.

tor

Earth and Star Sensing
The combination of Earth and star sensing works similarly to sensing the Earth.
Sun and Moon [Wertz, 2001]. The direction and distance to the Earth are se~
relative to the inertial frame of the fixed stars. This is then used to directly determme
the direction and distance to the spacecraft. The Earth and stars are available nearly
continuously in imy Earth orbit and star identification is becoming less of a problem
with the introduction of substantially better computers for space use.
1l.7.3 Orbit Maintenance and Control
Chapter 6 presented relevant AV equations for orbit mainte~ance and ~ntrol. This
section discusses when orbit control is necessary and what opbons are available to do
it. Section 2.1.2 discusses autonomous orbit maintenance as part of a fully autonomous
spacecraft.
.
Most small spacecraft do not require orbit control and have no onboard propulSIOn.
This has the advantage of eliminating one spacecraft subsystem and, therefore, reducing the spacecraft's cost, weight, and complexity. However, once the spacecraft ~as
separated from the launch vehicle or upper. stage, no further a;>ntrol of. the satellite
orbit is possible and the satellite will be .subJ~t to dra.g and orM d~a~ m low-Earth
orbit and to cumulative secular perturbabons m all orbits. Usually, thiS IS only acceptable for satellites that will last from 1 to 3 years but may be suitable for longer periods
in some cases. For example, the Voyager spacecraft, having left the solar system, will
be uncontrolled indefinitely. The only real objective, however, is to maintain communications and, to some degree, sample the interstellar medium.
.
We can also adjust a spacecraft's orbit using other means than onbo~ propulsion,
such as the Orbiter or an orbit-transfer vehicle or tug. For example, With the Space
Telescope, the Orbiter is used for both instrument replacement and to return the
Telescope to a higher altitude.

508

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.7

Orbit control is needed when any of the following are required:

• Targeting to achieve an end orbit or position-as in satellite rendezvous or
interplanetary missions
• To overcome secular orbit perturbations-such as altitude maintenance in
low-Earth orbit or geosynchronous stationkeeping
• To maintain relative orientations-as in constellation maintenance
Each of these is discussed briefly below. An orbit lifetime of more than 1 to 3 years
usually demands some type of orbit maintenance or control.
Targeting to achieve a particular orbit or location in space is the most common
reason for orbit control. Typically, we achieve the orbit objectives with one or two
large maneuvers, using several small maneuvers in between or for final adjustments.
For example, in transfer to geosynchronous orbit, an initial large maneuver occurs at
perigee in low-Earth orbit A second large maneuver follows at apogee near geosynchronous altitude. Fmally, several small orbit maneuvers over an extended period
place the satellite in its final position. This has been traditionally been done by using
large, high-thrust engines for the major maneuvers and smaller engines for orbit
adjustments. However, as described in more detail in Sec. 7.5, low-thrust engines can
often be used efficiently for large !:J. Vs. This normally means smaller, lighter, lessexpensive engines and much smaller, simpler control systems. Propulsive maneuvers
usually are the largest attitude disturbance on the spacecraft and, therefore, affect the
size of the required attitude control system. Small thrusters can reduce the weight,
complexity, and cost of other components as well as the propulsion system itself.
We often associate major orbit changes with the early phases of a mission, but they
can occur throughout the life of the spacecraft. For example, most geosynchronous
spacecraft can be shifted so that the longitude of the spacecraft is adjusted to meet
changing needs. Spacecraft can also be retargeted to achieve new objectives, such as
the retargeting of the ISEE-C spacecraft to rendezvous with Cornet Giacobini-Zinner
in 1985. The need for maneuvers of this type may arise after the spacecraft has been
launched. They are not planned in advance but simply take advantage of existing
resources. Finally, as described in Sec. 21.2, it is becoming more critical to use an endof-life maneuver for spacecraft disposal either in low-Earth orbit or in geosynchronous
orbit. These maneuvers are used either to have the spacecraft reenter in a location that
is not hazardous, or put the spacecraft in an orbit where it will not harm other spacecraft. While not important during the early years of space exploration, the requirement
to maintain a Clean space environment will become much more stringent in the future.
We must also maintain the orbit to overcome long-term secular perturbations, as
described in detail in Chap. 6. All geosynchronous spacecraft require orbit maintenance in the East-West direction to avoid interference and possible collisions with
other spacecraft. Furthermore, most use orbit maintenance in a North-South direction
to maintain a near-zero inclination. In low-Earth orbit, altitude maintenance is used to
overcome atmospheric drag and achieve a longer working life. Other orbit types, such
as Sun-synchronous or repeating ground track, may also require orbit maintenance.
Nearly all constellations require some type of orbit maintenance to prevent
collisions between satellites and maintain the constellation pattern over time. In principle, we could use relative stanonkeeping in which we maintain the relative positions
between satellites but not their absolute position. In practice, however, this will make
orbit maintenance more complex and will not save propellant or reduce the number of

11.7

Guidance and Navigation

509

computations. In a low-Earth orbit constellation with relative orbit maintenance, we
would, in principle, maintain all satellites in the constellation to decay at the same rate
as the slowest-decaying satellite at any time. But the entire constellation would stilI
decay in this process. Therefore, it would slowly change its altitude and need to be
reboosted at some later time.
The alternative is absolute stationkeeping, shown in Fig. 11-51. Here, we maintain
each spacecraft within a mathematically defmed box moving with the constellation
pattern. As long as we maintain the constellation's altitude, absolute stationkeeping is
just as efficient as relative stationkeeping. AIl in-track stationkeeping maneuvers are
done firing in the direction of motion to put energy taken out by atmospheric drag back
into the orbit We put in more or less energy at any given time, depending upon the
amount of drag and the atmospheric density, as described in Sec. 8.1.5.
Satellite 1 Box

To Sun
Satellite 4 Box

FIg. 11-51. Constellation Statlonkeeplng Maintains Each SatellHe In a "Box" Rotating with
the Constellation.

The amount of drag makeup for any satellite in a constellation depends on the
satellite's observed drift relative to its assigned box. At the forward edge of the box,
the applied !:J.V is increased, thus increasing the orbit altitude and period and sliding
the satellite rearward in phase relative to the box. Similarly, at the trailing edge, the
applied !:J.V is decreased, thus decreasing the altitude and period and sliding the satellite forward in phase. Because of the high spacecraft velocities in low-Earth orbit,
timekeeping is critical to maintaining the satellites' relative positions. A 1 sec difference in the time corresponds to a 7 km difference in in-track position. Maintaining the
same time throughout the constellation is important, but not difficult
Although the perturbative forces are different, constellation maintenance in
low-Earth orbit is analogous to stationkeeping in geosynchronous orbit In-track
and cross-track orbit maintenance in low-Earth orbit correspond to East-West and
North-South stationkeeping, respectively, in geosynchronous orbit Because the forces
involved are different, the correspondence is not exact. Altitude maintenance is
necessary in low-Earth orbit to overcome the effect of atmospheric drag. In geosyn-

510

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.7

chronousorbit. this would correspond to maintaining the mean drift rate relative to the
surface of the Earth at zero, so the stationkeeping box stays over a fixed location. In
low-Earth orbit. this corresponds to maintaining the box at a mathematically fixed p0sition in the constellation.

Ground-Based vs. Autonomous Orbit Control
Traditionally, orbit maintenance and control are executed from the ground. The required orbit adjustment will be computed at the ground station, and a series of
commands will be generated which are uploaded to the spacecraft and then downlinked for verification. Finally, the ground station sends a command to execute the
control commands, and the spacecraft carries them out based on an onboard clock.
This sequence protects the spacecraft against communications errors and allows
maneuvers when the spacecraft is out of sight of the ground station. The spacecraft is
often out of sight because orbit maneuvers are usually 180 deg out of phase from the
desired result. For example, in landing on the Moon, the principal burns bring the
spacecraft down to the Earth-facing side of the Moon and take the returning astronauts
back to Earth. Both burns occur on the far side of the Moon, entirely out of sight of the
Earth.
In normal geosynchronous stationkeeping the spacecraft is allowed to drift to one
side of the stationkeeping box. A maneuver then changes its velocity so it will drift
across the box and back before needing another maneuver. This is similar to keeping
a ball in the air by continuously hitting it upward with a paddle. The main reason for
this sequence is that it maximizes the time interval between maneuvers and, therefore,
minimizes the amount of ground operations, which carry the potential for communications errors or command mistakes.
In the past. there was no realistic alternative to orbit control from the ground. Now,
however, autonomous navigation systems have made autonomous orbit maintenance
possible, economical, and safe. Autonomous orbit maintenance drives down the cost
and risk of missions by having a major part of the day-to-day operations on board the
spacecraft. As described in Sec. 2.1.2, autonomous oroit maintenance is a key component in a fully autonomous spacecraft bus, which can further reduce mission costs.
(For further discussion of autonomous orbit control, see Wertz [1996, 2001), Wertz,
et al. [1997], KOnigsmann, et al. [1996], Collins, et al. [1996], or Glickman [1994}.)
Microcosm has developed a commercial, autonomous Orbit Control Kit flight software system scheduled for flight validation on UoSAT-12 in 1999. 'This and other
approaches are also scheduled to be flight tested later on EO-I which is intended to do
formation flying with LandSat-7.
Orbit and attitude control are analogous, with several important differences.
Typically, we must control attitude moderately often or continuously if we are to avoid
serious consequences. A satellite that loses attitude control will usually tumble and
then lose the payload function, power on the solar arrays, and contact with the ground.
It also may point sensitive 'instruments at the Sun or have substantial thermal
problems. Even a brief attitude control failure can destroy the mission. In contrast.
orbit control maneuvers occur infrequently, and any computer that can do autonomous
navigation will easily accommodate the necessary additional computations. As long as
we control the orbit with low-thrust systems (Sees. 75, 17.4), a short-term failure will
cause no damage. Gravity takes care of short-term orbit control very well. If the
orbit-control system fails, the ground or the onboard system will determine that the
satellite is slowly drifting from its assigned slot and a warning can be issued with

11.7

Guidance and Navigation

511

adequate time to fix the problem or implement a back-up before adverse consequences

OCC~ith autonomous orbit maintenance we can optimize characteristics other than the
time between maneuvers, such as the size of the control box. Just as we would not
ordinarily implement attitude control to minimize the number of commands sent to the
momentum wheel, we do not have to minimize the number of thruster firings so long
as the duty cycle is within the range of th~ ~~ and the thruster pulses ~ long
enough to achieve high efficiency. Ordinarily usmg many short pulses IS not a
problem, as thrusters are frequently used for attitude control and small thrusters have
lifetimes far in excess of the required number of on-off cycles.
For some missions, autonomous orbit control is required simply because of the
nature of the mission itself. This is the case for .planetary flybys or a mission t~ th~ far
side of the Moon in which either the spacecraft IS out of contact or the commumcalions
delays are too long for normal ground control. Generally, ground s~tions do the o~bit­
control computations and upload them to ~e spacecraft fo~ e~ecution. at a later ~e.
This is a semi-autonomous approach which can meet IDlSSlon reqwrements while
.
.
maintaining ground c o n t r o l . .
In geosynchronous stationkeeping, the mal.n reason for autonomo~ Orolt ~­
tenance is to reduce operations cost and nsk, rather than a specific teclmic~
requirement." For a constellation at any aItil?de, the overall process of orbi~ de~rIDl­
nation and control represents a major operational cost. It also represents a Significant
risk element in which any operational error or failure of the ground system could damage or destroy the constellation. The orbit maintenance o~ration is necessarily cu;ned
out on board the spacecraft by firing thrusters. PerforIDlng the control computalio~
on board the spacecraft can reduce both cost and risk. Frrst. it eliminates the ~ten~al
for operator error in a very repe~tive ~ction. ~econd, i.t ~uces commumcation
errors or failures frequently as8OC1ated W1th operational aCtivities.
The argument has been made that autonomous orbit control is a range-safety
concern because having a spacecraft adjust its orbit without operator oversight c~uld
endanger other spacecraft or people. This is a reasonable conc~rn for firing highthrust. large IIV engines, but it is not a problem for low-thrust mruntenance. A w.atchdog timer can easily limit the propulsive burn ~me to keep bums small. E~en If the
watchdog system fails, the amount of propellant m most low-thrust systems 18 too low
to endanger other space systems or people on the ground.
The principal reason for not undertaking autonomous orbit ~tenance and
control for future missions is tradition. It has not been done that way m the past, and
there is a very strong desire in expensiv~ space mission~ to m~ntain ~ose. ~edures
that have worked previously. A mechamsm for overcommg this potential nsk IS supervised autonomy in which orbit maintenance maneuvers are computed on board ~e
spacecraft anll verification from the ground is ~uired before they are ex~. This
allows mission personnel to gain confidence m the onboard computations before
.,."
permitting fully autonomous operation.
A second alternative is to mplement "autonomous orbit mruntenance from the
ground. In this case, the computations would be done autonomously, but would be

• A technical requirement for autonomous orbit maintenance can arise in geosynchronous
stationkeeping when there is a desire to place additional satellite~ in a D~W ~ slotlD this
case autonomoUs orbit maintenance is needed to reduce the SIZe of tile orbit-control deadband, which would be impractical if we had to do frequent commanding from the ground.

512

Spacecraft Subsystems

11.7

done at the ground station and then sent to the spacecraft for execution. This has the
advantage of maintaining some characteristics of traditional orbit maintenance and
also minimizes the amount of hardware on board the spacecraft. Unfortunately, this
~ppro~h can add significant complexity and risk to the mission. If the navigation data
IS obtained on board the spacecraft, it would need to be communicated to the ground
for processing. Then, the results and commands would go to the spacecraft and be Verified for later execution. This makes the process much more complex and increases the
potential for communications errors and transmitting the wrong data to the wrong
spacecraft. Most likely, these disadvantages would outweigh any advantage of doing
the sm~l amount of command processing on the ground. If the spacecraft has enough
computtng power on board, a reasonable alternative might be to compute the orbit control. on board the spacecraft and send it to the ground for verification and approval
before actually executing the command. This allows full ground override. It also
allows the system to use an on-orbit process with less cost and higher reliability, whenever operators are confident that the system is working smoothly.
If the spacecraft navigation is done with the traditional approach of tracking from
the ground, doing the commanding from the ground and uploading commands to the
spacecraft is an efficient alternative and minimizes the overall communication problem. In this case, the traditional cost and complexity of orbit maintenance from the
ground remain, although it may be possible to reduce this somewhat with more
automation.
Autonomous navigation and orbit control can significantly reduce the cost of space
operations. For most space missions, this is a major cost. It should also reduce risk
because there are fewer failure modes than with operator-driven or ground-based
systems. For modem spacecraft, almost no one would recommend doing attitude
determination and control from the ground, even though this is a more complex task
wit? more serious adverse consequences than orbit control. The main argument
agatnst autonomous orbit determination and control is tradition-we have not done it
that way in the past and, therefore, should not do it in the future.
11.7.4 Sizing Autonomous Guidance and Navigation
The implementation of a purely ground-based guidance and navigation system is
!'<>th expensive and straightforward. This is the traditional approach, and is described
tn detail in Chap. 14. The process is well established for geosynchronous spacecraft,
low-Earth orbit spacecraft, and interplanetary missions.
The main reason for considering autonomous guidance and navigation is to reduce
mission cost and risk. But we can also extend mission life, put more spacecraft into a
geosynchronous slot, or undertake missions which we could not realistically do without some autonomy.
. Orbit and attitude sensing and control are strongly interrelated. In many cases, they
WIll use the same sensors and the same actuators. The attitude control sensors and
actuators will need to control the spacecraft during orbit maneuvers, which will probably be the largest source of disturbance torques during the spacecraft's operating life.
In ad?ition. orbit and attitude budgets are often combined to produce pointing and
mapptng budgets to satisfy mission requirements (see Fig. 4-6 and Sec. 5-4). Our goal
should be to reduce the total cost and risk of attitude and orbit determination and
control. (For an extended discussion of this objective. see Wertz [2(01).)
In most cases. we would meet our objective of minimum cost. weight, and risk by
combining elements of orbit and attitude determination and control. Unfortunately.

Guidance and Navigation

11.7

513

this may be difficult to achieve in practice. Traditionally. attitude determination and
control is the responsibility of a controls organization. and is a well-defined element
of the spacecraft bus. Orbit determination and control. on the other hand, is usually the
responsibility of a systems organization which will ultimately implement this function
on the ground. The guidance and navigation function is ordinarily not allocated weight
or power on board the spacecraft ~d is not c~idered a normal spacecraft ~ction.
This chapter contains separate secbons on the attitude control system and the gwdance
and navigation system because these are normally separate functions. Getting these
functions to work together is perhaps the single largest hurdle in developing autonomous navigation and orbit control and. therefore, fully autonomous spacecraft.
TABLE 11-67.

System

GPS

Size, Weight, and Power of Alternative Autonomous Navigation Systems.
All systems are evolving, so size, weight, and power will probably decrease In the
future.
Orbit!
Attitude

(ctn3)

Honeywell

Orbit

4,000

Manufacturer

Size

Weight
(kg)
4

Power
(W)

Other Requirements!

Comments

35

GPS

RI

Orbit

4,700

4

12

MANS

Microcosm

Both

(1)

(1)

(1)

Uses spacecraft clock
and spacecraft computer

Space
Sextant

Martin
Marietta

Both

4x1OS

25

50

Can eliminate other

Ste//ar
Refraction

NlA

Both

(1)

(1)

(1)

(4)

Landmark
Tracking

NlA

Both

(2)

(2)

(2)

(4)

Satellite
Cross/inks

NlA

Orbit

(3)

(3)

(3)

(4)

Earth and
NlA
Star Sensing

Both

(1)

(1)

(1)

(4); similar to MANS

attitude sensors

(1) Uses sensors normaDy used for attitude only. Very small (or no) added weight and power for
navigation sensing.
(2) Intent Is to use observation payload sensor.
(3) Uses crossUnks on board for fntersateDIte communications. Would need secondary system until sufficient
number of satellites are in place.
(4) Conceptual design only. Would probably use spacecraft computer.

The problem of combining orbit and attitude systems is illustrated by Table 11-67.
which provides size, weight, and power for alternative autonomous navigation systems. Several of the systems. such as the GPS receivers. are orbit-only. although in the
future they may be expanded to include attitude as well. Other systems, such as MANS
and the Space Sextant, do both the attitude and orbit function. In these cases. one
should look at the difference in weight and power required to achieve navigation from
that required for attitude alone. Even this assessment is complicated because orbit
determination requires computer resources which may be regarded as a Pm:t of the
attitude control system, the navigation system, the command and data handling system, or the general spacecraft computer. For many of the systems, such as .lan~k
tracking or crosslink navigation, the computer is the principal element assOCIated WIth

514

Spacecraft Subsystems

References

autonomous navigation and control. The main message is to avoid "double booking"
components for guidance and navigation and to look at the joint implementation of
orbit and attitude determination and control when beginning to optimize system
performance.
Autonomous navigation and orbit maintenance is too new to have a standard implementation in terms of where computations are done. But the nature of the
computations themselves and the data used suggest a natural configuration: using a
single spacecraft processor for determining and controlling the attitude and orbit.
These functions will probably use .either the same or similar sensors and may use the
same actuators. Most of the computing is associated with sensor processing, data
handling, and anomaly resolution. The orbit and attitude computations themselves are
normally much smaller. The implementation of either orbit or attitude control
algorithms represents by far the smallest part of the throughput requirement. Thus,
control adds little burden for any processor which is already determining the orbit or
attitude.
A reasonable initial design would incorporate all of these functions in a single
spacecraft processor. Actual implementation may vary, depending upon the specific
hardware and software. For example, star-sensor processing may be incorporated
within the star sensor itself, or may be done in the same processor as other orbit or
attitude functions. The overall objective, however, should continue to be to minimize
the cost and risk of determining and controlling the orbit and attitude for the entire
mission.

Chory, M. A., Hoffman, D. P., ~ajor, C'"S. and V. A.. Spector. 1984. "A?tonomous
Navigation-Where We are In 1984. Paper presented at AIAA Gwdance and
Control Conference, Seattle, WA. August 20-22.
Chory, M. A., Hoffman, D. P. and J. L. LeMay. 1986. Satellite Autonomous Navigation-Status and History. TRW Internal Report.
Collins, John T., Simon Dawson, and James R. Wertz. 1996. "Autonomous Constellation Maintenance System." Presented at 10th Annual AIAAlUSU Conference on
Small Satellites, Logan, Utah, September 16-19.
Conley, Peter L. 1998. Space Vehicle Mechanisms. New York: John Wiley & Sons,
Inc.
Escobal, Pedro R. 1965. MethodS of Orbit Determination. Malabar, FL: Robert E.
Krieger Publishing Co.
Fortescue, Peter, and John Stark. 1995. Spacecraft Systems Engineering. New York:
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Gilmore, D.G. 2002. Satellite Thermal Control Handbook, VoL 1: Fundamental
Technologies. Los Angeles, CA: The Aerosp~ce Corporation Press.
Glickman, Ronald E. 1994. ''TIDE: The Timed-Destination Approach to Constella!i0n
Formationkeeping." Paper AAS 94-122, presented at the AAS/AIAA Spaceflight
Mechanics Meeting, CoCoa Beach, FL, February 14-16.

References
Agrawal, Brij N. 1986. Design of Geosynchronous Spacecraft. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Anthony, Jack. 1992. "Autonomous Space Navigation Experiment." Paper No. AIAA
92-1710 presented at the AIAA Space Programs and Technologies Conference.
Huntsville, AL, March 24-26.
Battin, Richard H. 1999. An Introduction to the Mathematics and Methods of Astrodynamics. New York: AIAA Education Series.
Booker, R. A. 1978. "Space Sextant Autonomous Navigation and Attitude Reference
System-Flight Hardware Development and Accuracy Demonstration. Rocky
Mountain Guidance and Control Conference." Paper AAS 78-124.
Bruhn, E. F. 1973. Analysis and Design of Flight Vehicle Structures. Tri-State Offset
Co.
CCSDS 201.O-B-1. January 1987. Blue Book Telecommand Channel Service Part 1
Architectural Specification.
Chao, C.C., H. Bernstein, W.H. Boyce, and Rl. Perkins. 1992. "Autonomous Stationkeeping of Geosynchronous Satellites Using a GPS Receiver." AIAA-92-4655-CP,
A92-52106.
Chetty, P. R. K. 1991. Satellite Technology and Its Applications (2nd Edition). New
York: McGraw~Hill.
Chobotov, Vladimir, ed. 1991. Orbital Mechanics. Washington, DC: AIAA ..

515

I

Hofmann-Wellenhof, B., H. Lichtenegger, and J. Collins. 1997. GPS Theory and
Practice (4th Edition). New York: Springer-Verlag Wien.
Hosken, R.W. and J.R. Wertz. 1995. "Microcosm Autonomous Navigation System
On-Orbit Operation." Paper AAS 95-074, presented at the 18th Annual AAS
Guidance and Control Conference Keystone, CO, February 1-5.
Hummel, S.G. 1984; "Spacecraft Autonomous Navigation Using Stellar Refraction
Measurements." Paper presented at AIAA Guidance and Control Conference.
Seattle, WA. August 20-22.

IEEE. 1972. IEEE Standard 100. IEEE Standard Dictionary of Electrical and Electronic Terms.
IRIG; Telemetry Group. 1986. IRIG Standard 106 Telemetry Standards. Inter-Range
Instrumentation Group, Range Commanders Council.
Jordan, J. F. 1981. "Deep Space Navigation Systems and Operations." Paper presented
at the ESA International Symposium on Spacecraft Flight Dynamics. May.
Kaplan, Elliott D. 1996. Understanding GPS Principles and Applications. Boston,
Artech House, Inc.
Kaplan, Marshall H. 1976. Modem Spcicecraft Dynamics and Control. New York:
John Wiley & Sons.
Karam; Robert D. 1998. Satellite Thermal Control for Systems Engineers. Volume
181 in "Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics." Reston, V A: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics.

516

. Spacecraft Subsystems

References

517

KOnigsmann, Hans 1., John T. Collins, Simon Dawson, arid James R. Wertz. 1996.
"Autonomous Orbit Maintenance System." Acta Astronautica 39:977-985.

Parkinson, Bradford W., and James J. Spilker, Jr., eds. 1996. Global Positioning
System: Theory and Application. Vols. I and II. Washington, DC: AIAA.

Leick. Alfred. 1995. GPS Satellite Surveying (2nd Edition). New York: Wiley-Interscience Publication, John Wiley & Sons.

Pisacane: Vincent L. and Robert C. Moore. 1994. Fundamentals of Space Systems.
New York: Oxford University Press, Inc.

Lin, E. I, J.W. Stultz, and R. T. Reeve. 1995. "Test-Derived Effective Emittance for
Cassini MLI Blankets and Heat Loss Characteristics in the Vicinity of Seams."
AIAA paper 95-2015, June 19-22.

porter, J. P. and W. A. Hite. Overview/Current Status of the NA VSTAR Global Positioning System, IEEE PLANS. 1984.

Long, Cappellari, Velez, and Fuchs, eds. 1989. Goddard Trajectory Determination
System Mathematical Theory, Revision 1. Goddard Space Flight Center and Computer Sciences Corporation. NASNGoddard Space Flight Center, Flight Dynamics
Division. Code 550.
Markley, F. Landis. 1981. "Autonomous Satellite Navigation Using Landmarks."
Paper No. 81-205 presented to the AAS/AIAA Astrodynamics Specialist Conference. Lake Tahoe, NV, August 3-5.
Martin Marietta Aerospace. 1977. Design and lAboratory Testing of Self-Contained
High Altitude Navigation System, Phase I-The Space Sextant Autonomous
Navigation Attitude Reference System (SS-ANARS), Phase 1 Final Report,

MCR-17-196. Denver, CO.
MIL-A-83577. 1988. General Specification for Moving Mechanical Assemblies for
Space and lAunch Vehicles.

MIL-HDBK-I1B, Change Notice 1, 16 June 1989, Polymer Matrix Composites.
Philadelphia: Naval Publications Forms Center.
MIL-STD-1582. 1984. Satellite Data Link Standard (SDLS).
Miller, M., H. Hanover, K. Patel, and E. Wahl. 1990. "Neptune Encounter: Guidance
and Control's Finest Hour." Paper presented at the 13th Annual AAS Guidance and
Control Conference. Keystone, Colorado. February 3-7.
Morgan, Walter L. and Gary D. Gordon. 1989. Communications Satellite Handbook.
New York: John Wiley & Sons.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration. 1975. Astronautics Structures
Manual, Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, AL: National Aeronautics and
Space Administration.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration. 1988. TDRSS Users Guide. NASA
Goddard STDN 101.2.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 1989.
Deep Space Network Interface Design Handbook. Vol. I and II. JPL-DSN 810-5
RevisionD.
Noton, Maxwell. 1998. Spacecraft Navigation and Guidance. London: SpringerVerlag.
Parkinson, B.S. and S.W. Gilbert. 1983. NAVSTAR: Global Positioning System-Ten
Years Later. Proceedings of the IEEE. Vol. 71, No. 10. October 1983.

Roark, R. J., and W. C. Young. 1975. Formulas for Stress and Strain (5th Edition).
New York: McGraw-Hili.
Rolfe, S. T., and J. M. Barsom. 1977. Fracture and Fatigue Control in Structures.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall Inc.
Roy, A.E. 1991. Orbital Motion (3rd Edition). Bristol and Philadelphia: Adam Hilger.
Sarafin, Thomas P., ed.·1995. Spacecraft Structures and Mechanisms: From Concept
to Launch. Torrance, CA, and Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Microcosm Press and
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Schildcrout, M. and M. Stein. 1928. Critical Combinations of Shear and Direct Axial
Stress for Curved Rectangular Panels. NACA TN 1928. Washington, DC: National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics.
Singer, Fred S. 1964. Torques and Attitude Sensing in Earth Satellites. New York:
Academic Press.
Tai, Frank and Peter D. Noerdlinger. 1989. "A Low Cost Autonomous Navigation
System." Paper No. AAS 89-001 presented at the 12th Annual AAS Guidance and
Control Conference, Keystone, CO, Feb. 4-8.
TdR-0059(6110-01)-3, Reissue H. 1987. Air Force Satellite Control Facility
Space/Ground Interface.

Tsai, S. W. 1987. Composites Design (3rd Edition), Dayton, OH: Think Composites,
Inc.
U.S. Air Force Materials Laboratory. 1987. MIL-HDBK-5E, Metallic Materials and
Elementsfor Aerospace Vehicle Structures. Wright-Patterson AFB, OH: Air Force
Materials Laboratory.
Vallado, David A. 2001. Fundamentals ofAstrodynamics and Applications, (2nd edition). EI Segundo, CA: Microcosm Press and Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Wertz, James R. ed. 1978. Spacecraft Attitude Determination and Control. Dordrecht,
The Netherlands: D. Reidel Publishing Company.
Wertz, James R., and Wiley J. Larson, eds. 1996. Reducing Space Mission Cost.
Torrance, CA: Microcosm Press, and Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Wertz, James R., !John T. Collins, Simon Dawson, Hans J. Koenigsmann, and Curtis
W. Potterveld; 1997. "Autonomous Constellation Maintenance." Presented at the
IAF Workshop on Satellite Constellations, Toulouse, France, Nov. 18-19.

518

Spaceeraft Subsystems

Wertz, James R. 2001. Mission Geometry; Orbit and Constellation Design and
Management. Torrance, CA: Microcosm Press and Dordrecht, The Netherlands'
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
.

Chapter 12
Spacecraft Manufacture and Test
Emery L Reeves, United States Air Force Academy
12.1
12.2
12.3
12.4
12.5
12.6

Engineering Data
Manufacture of High-Reliability Hardware
Inspection and Quality Assurance
The Qualification Program
Spacecraft Qualification Test Flow
Launch Site Operations

This chapter presents an overview of the spacecraft manufactming, assembly, and
test process and the underlying test theory. A system designer must understand this
process because hardware manufacture and test heavily influence the program's cost
and schedule. In addition, testing technology and special facility requirements may
affect program feasibility. This chapter is oriented principally toward the construction
of a single satellite or the first satellite of a production run. See Sec. 19.1 for a discussion of the "production line" approach applicable to building satellites in large
numbers such as those which are a part of a large constellation.
Table 12-1 lists the names we use in this chapter to describe the parts of a spacecraft. For example, piece parts are individual parts, including transistors, integrated
circuits, or mechanical parts such as housings, panels, bearings, and gears. A component is a complete unit or black box such as a transmitter, receiver, computer, or
electromechanical actuator. Sometimes a functional group of parts, or assembly, is
manufactured or tested together. An assembly as used here may be part of a component
or may be integrated directly into the spacecraft. Subsystems consist of groups of
components. They may be assembled and tested as subsystems or integrated into the
spacecraft as components.
TABLE 12-1. Hardware Nomenclature. Spacecraft are built up from subsystems. which are
composed of components.
Piece Part

Individual part such as resistor. Integrated Circuit, bearing. circuit board. or
housing

Component

Complete functional unit such as a control electronics assembly. an antenna,
a battery. or a power control unit

Assembly

Functional group of parts such as a hinge assembly. an antenna feed, or
a deployment boom

Subsystem

All of the components and assembnes that comprise a spacecraft subsystem

Spacecraft

Complete vehicle

519

520

Spacecraft Manufacture and Test

Methods for the manufacture· and test of spacecraft and spacecraft components
derive from the aircraft and electronics industries. But spacecraft hardware is less
plentiful and less accessible for maintenance. In spacecraft production, a run of lOis
high volume and spacecraft recalls are extremely rare. Furthermore, environmental
forces severely stress the hardware during launch.
The theory of type test (see Table 12-2) is a basic principle affecting the manufacture and test of spacecraft hardware. Type test theory depends on preparing and
controlling complete and exact engineering data (drawings, specifications, and procedures). If the engineering data controls the hardware constructiOt;l completely, all items
built to the same data are equivalent and the results of any single-item test are valid for
all like items. In particular, if a representative article (type test article) passes a
sequence of qualification tests, all other articles built to the same engineering data
should also pass. In other words, the design is qualified. We simply have to llllIke sure
articles are identical by controlling the engineering data and manufacturing processes.
Less severe acceptance tests then certify proper workmanship.
TABLE 12-2. Theory of Type Testing. The type test theory is the basis for qualification testing.
Basis

Engineering data Is complete and exact.
EngIneering data completely controls manufacture.
AU items manufactured to the same engineering data are Identical.

Therefore

Results of qualification test for one article are valId for all articles.

Table 12-3 lists the steps in manufacturing, integrating, and testing a spacecraft. As
system designers, we must determine how long each step will take and identify any
test or facility requirement that is risky or peculiar to the program. Above all, we
should schedule qualification tests to qualify the spacecraft completely before launch.
The following sections address these steps and describe important aspects of system
design.
TABLE 12-3. Steps In Manufacturing, integrating, and Testing.
Step

Description

Comments

Prepare
Engineering
Data

Complete drawings and all
supporting Information
such as material and part
specifications and
processing methods

Engineering data will consIst of several hundred
drawings for each component, specifications for
each pIece-part type and process. assembly
drawings. and test equIpment data

Manufacture
Component

Stages:
1. Manufacture plannIng
2. Parts procurement and
test
3. Component assembly
4. Component acceptance
test

Typfcal timing:
1. In parallel with engineering-data preparation
2. Mechanical parts and materiais 1-6 mos
Electronic parts 3-18 mos

Qualify

Component

Functional test and
environmental exposure

Integrate
and Test
Spacecraft

Mechanical assembly.
functional test, and
environmental exposure

3.1-3mos
4. 1-3 mos; acceptance test includes functional
test and environmental eXposure
Takes 1-6 mos. depending on complexity and
fragility of component, severity of environment,
and number of failures
Takes 6-18 mos

Engineering Data

12.1

521

. 12.1 Engineering Data
Engineering data (see Table 12-4) is drawings, specifications, and procedures.
Standard formats and contents for military contracts are in MIL-SID 100 (drawings)·
and MIL-SID 490 (specifications). Most aerospace companies use similar standards.
Various documents combine to control the hardware manufacture. Each piece part,
assembly, or component is described by its own individual drawing, and drawing call
outs describe materials and processes. Drawing numbers identify parts. In the same
way, drawings control assembly of parts into higher-level assemblies and identify
integration hardware. Drawings also control interfaces. size. shape, and mounting
provisions.
TABLE 12-4. Defining and Controlling Engineering Data.
Engineering Data

Drawings. specifications. and procedures

Role of Engineering

Produce engineering data

Role of Manufacturing

Build hardware to meet engineering data

Role of Quality Control

Ensure that the hardware is built and tested to meet
engineering data

Configuration Management

Systems and procedures that Identity. account for. and
control engineering data

Configuration management is the process of controlling engineering data. It
includes identifying the engineering data required for manufacture (configuration
identification), controlling changes, maintaining the engineering database (configuration control), reviewing and auditing the engineering data (configuration audit), and
verifying that the hardware is built as designed (configuration verification). Changes
to the engineering data (engineering change orders and procedure change orders) are
also tracked. For military contracts, MIL-SID 483, MIL-SID 1521, and DOD-SID
480 itemize configuration-management requirements. Most aerospace contractors
have systems that conform to these standards.

12.2 Manufacture of IDgh-Reliability Hardware
The first step in manufacturing spacecraft hardware is to translate the engineering
data into manufacturing plans, flows, instructions, manufacturing aids, and tooling.
This occurs as the design matures and manufacturing personnel may influence .the
design for ease of manufacture. Engineering data is formally released at a Critical
Design Review. Typically, we review manufacturing plans at this time or in' a
Manufacturing Readiness Review shortly afterward.
The manufacturing planning starts with subassemblies by generating parts kits,
preparing detailed procedures for assembly, and identifying inspection and test
requirements. We must also identify special facilities (such as clean rooms); manufacturing methods, precautions, and controls; and training and certification levels of
personnel. Based on these plans, we then call out the manufacturing steps in detailed
procedures. A copy of the procedures travels with the hardware and is checked off as
• Military specifications and standards are no longer being maintained and are due to be superseded by industty standards which are not yet in place.

522

Spacecraft Manufacture and Test

12.2

the steps are completed. This paper becomes part of the permanent record of the
assembly. Inspection and test results are also part of the record, and some installations
include photographs of each assembly.
Manufacturers buy most mw materials from certified vendors. who certify the
material quality. They buy electronic piece parts to meet individual specifications
which call out performance and quality requirements. Under current pmctices. highreliability electronic parts are constructed for a particular program. Such procurement
takes a long time. and most parts undergo extensive testing before combining into
components. Flight hardware usually requires the highest level of reliability. which in
the past has been called S-level. Lower reliability parts may work for prototype and
qualification units not intended for flight. In addition to vendor lead times. each part
order must be bid and negotiated, which adds weeks to the procurement time. The current pmctice is to have the part supplier test each part for performance (group A tests)
and a sample from each lot to extremes (group B and C tests). The manufacturer burns
the parts in while monitoring their performance and does a destructive physical analysis (DPA test) on a sample.
The industry is currently undergoing a major revision in the way that parts are specified and procured. In the Department of Defense this is called "Acquisition Reform"
and is chamcterized by elimination of govermilent specifications and standards for
parts and processes. Industry is expected to replace these specifications and standards
with their own controls or use Professional Society Standards. A consistent set of such
standards is not yet in place although efforts are under way to produce them (see for
instance AlAA Recommended Practice for Parts Managemen~ AIAA R-1OO-1996).
Extensive parts information is also available on the Internet at Air Force and NASA
sites.
To contend with the lead times for parts and materials. manufacturers must order
them before they see component engineering data. Thus. we establish a Project
Approved Parts List (PAPL) and Project Approved Materials List (PAML) early in
the program. Because designers must use the preferred part or identify and justify
new parts. these approved lists reduce the number of part types and allow early
procurement.
Manufacturing facilities cover mechanical manufacturing, electronic manufacturing, spacecraft assembly and test, and special functions. Mechanical manufacturing
includes standard machine shops, plus locations for mechanical assembly, plating and
chemical treatment, composite manufacture, adhesive bonding, and elevated temperature treatment. Although most aerospace facilities are quite clean,mechanical
manufacturing does not normally need controlled c1eanIiness. But electromechanical
and optical manufacturing, as well as the tailoring of thermal blankets, do need
controlled clean rooms-normally sepamte from conventional mechanical manufacturing. Table 12-5 shows c1eanIiness requirements for various opemtions.
Electronic manufacturing facilities include areas for building printed circuits and
clean rooms for buildfug and testing electronic assemblies. Test facilities may include
anechoic chambers and screen rooms containing various types of geneml-purpose test
equipment as well as special purpose testers for circuit boards and components.
Component tests may also require environmental test faciIities.
Spacecraft assembly and test opemtions are normally conducted in controlledcleanliness facilities, which are often high-bay hangars. Spacecraft functional tests are
conducted with special purpose test sets. Spacecraft environmental testing requires
large vibmtion and thermal-vacuum equipment.

523

Inspection and QnaHty Assurance

12.3
TABLE 12-5.

FacUlty Cleanliness Requirements (FED STD 209). Class 10,000 means less
than 10,000 particles per cubic foot.
Faclllty/OperetJon

Cleanliness.

--~---i

Mechanical Manufacturing

Not controlled

Bectronic Assembly

Class 10,000

Bectromechanlcal Assembly

Class 100

Inertial Instruments

Class 100

Optical Assembly

Class 100

Spacecraft Assembly and Test

Cless 100,000

Many times a spacecmft will need a special facility to ~tect sen~itive eq~I?ment
or prevent outside interference. Because optical ~uipment IS eSpec1al1~ sensItive ~o .
contamination. it must be u1tm-clean. Payload ~s1:rUr?ents that req~ cryO~~~IC
temperatures, absence of magnetic fields, or RF lsolation call for spectal facilities
which may increase program cost and schedule.

12.3 Inspection and Quality Assurance
Quality assurance verifies that the manufacture and testing o~ the sp~ and its
com nents conform to engineering data. MIL Q 9858A descnbes quality assurance
for :itary progmms. Table 12-6 lists its elements: quality. program management,
.
facilities and standards control of purchases, and manufacturmg control.
A key element in th~ quality program is establishing ~ints ~e PJ'O?ucti?n flow
where we can make sure the hardware construction compbes WIth Its ~gmeenng data
before the next step keeps us from inspecting it. In S?me cases. ~ontro~g the process
on the production line will ensure the hardware quality. Process mspection and control
thus substitutes for direct test.
.
We must also verify that vendors supplying spacecraft hardware: ha~e satisf~ry
quality assurance progmms by certifying their progmms and penodicaIly auditing
their performance.
.
proced.
.
Test surveillance involves certifying test equipment and.
ures, wttnessmg
tests, approving test records, and reviewing results. Test eqwpment ~ormally COJ)forms to a reduced set of controlled engineering data such ~ ~echamcal assembly
dmwings, parts lists, wire lists, panel photo~phs. and ~~tion test procedores.
Test surveillance personnel certify the construction and caIibmtion of the test set. They
approve hardware tests and they prepare and control the test data package. They also
formally review test ~u1ts before the next opemti~n proceeds.. Generally, the test
conductor chairs the test review board, but test surveillance proVldes the records and
documents the results for the archives.
.
Quality assurance must maintain data records for fo~ tests and failures. Often
quality-assurance people keep all failed parts and record f~ure and anomaly remits.
so they can identify repetitive failures and correct the desIgn weakilesses. AlthDugh
formal procedures govern tests, troubleshooting may deviate from them. For sucb
opemtions. quality assurance approves and maintains records of the exact steps
involved.

?n

524

Spacecraft Manufacture and Test

12.4

TABLE 12-6. Elemen1s of Quality Assursnce(MIL Q 9858A).
• Management
- Organization
- Initial quality planning
- SkIll requirements, training, personnel certification, records
- Work instructions

Manufacturing Inspection and test program

The Qualification Program

12.4

TABLE 12-7. Qualification Methods.

,-

Characteristics

Method

Dedicated
Qualification
Hardware
rauslify the First Set

of Flight Hardwsre

Workmanship
VISUal aids

525

Qualify by SimI7arity

- Records

A separate set of qualification components Is constructed and tested at
qualification levels. This set of components or a second set of
quaJification components Is assembled Into the qualification spececraft
and tested as a spacecraft at qua/ification levels.
The first set of flight components Is tested at qualification levels, then
assembled into a spacecraft which is tested at qualification levels. This
spacecraft Is then launched. This Is the prokHiight concept
Demonstrate thet the component and the environment are identical to
previously qualified hardware.

- Corrective action
-Costs
• Facilities and Standards
- Drawings, documentation, and changes
- Measuring and test equipment
- Production toonng and Inspection media
- Inspection equipment

Thermal

vacuum

Functional Test

- Special metrology

During Exposure

• Control of Purchases

AashX-ray"
Functional Test
OUring Exposure

• Manufacturing Control
- Materials and material control
- Production processing and fabricetion.
- Completed item inspection and test

"May not be required

Fig. 12-1. Flow of Qualification Testing for Components. A component is qualified by a
series of functional tests and exposure to environmental condItions.

- Handling storage and delivery
- Nonconforming material
- Inspection status

12.4 The Qualitication Program
(fuafific~tion tests of all flight-type hardware and software show that a spacecraft
desIgn IS swtable. These ~ts certify that th.e hardware and software work properly and
tha~ the hardware can SUl"Vlve and operate In the prescn'bed environment The qualifi~tion pro~ must test ~ch compone~t and the complete spacecraft It may also
Include fun~tional or enVlfODJDentaI testing of selected assemblies or subsystems.
Table 12-7 lists ways to qualify a spacecraft design.
We qualification test a component by checking how it performs (functional test)
and testing its abil~ty to s~ve the ~ticipated environment Each component is
po,,:ered and exercJsed by Its own specral-pmpose test set dwing test. Component
enVlfonmentaI tests include vibration, shock and thermal vacuum. If the component
~ust survive nuclear weapons effects, it may also wrdergo a flash X-ray test, which
slmula~. t!te prompt radiation dose. Sometimes, it may need a test of electromagnetic
compatibIlity (EMC). Figure 12-1 shows a typical qualification sequence.

A component must withstand vibration caused when lawrch vehicle acoustics and
engine rumble couple to it through its structural mowrt. Vibration is a random-signal
spectrum of frequencies from 20 Hz to 2,000 Hz. Chapter 18 gives vibration data for
current lawrch vehicles. Figure 12-2 shows the vibration level for the Atlas-Centaur,
as well as acceptance and qualification spectra [General Pynamics Space Systems
Division, 1988]. The acceptance spectrum envelops the expected environment and is
higher than the conducted level specified by the lawrch-vehicle contractor to accowrt
for structural resonances and acoustic input The qualification spectrum is uniformly
6 dB higher than the acceptance spectrum. To vibrate a component, an electromechanical shaker drives its base at a specified level of acceleration.
Components experience shocks from explosive release devices such as aerodynamic fairing separation or spacecraft separation bolts. The shock pulse is a
complex wave which induces mechanical response over a wide band of frequencies.
The pulse is specified by the peak acceleration response it excites in a mechanical system with 5% damping-as a function of the mechanical system's resonant frequency.
Chapter 18 shows shock-response spectra for various lawrch phenomena. Figure 12-3
shows the response spectra for acceptance and qualification of an Atlas-Centaur
device. We can use an electromechanical shaker to produce a shock pulse for component testing, or we can mowrt the component on a test structure and hit the structure
with a calibrated hammer blow.

r

526

Spacecraft Manufacture and Test

_

Component QuaJJficaIion
20.74 9 rms Overall

0.1

~

f

I

I\..

V
if

527

80

Boaster InteIface
2.7 9 rms Overall

)

0.001

"

"

'I

The Qualification Program

12.4

tive coupling to the chamber walls, we can cycle the component through its specified
temperature range. The component must work at temperature extremes and during
transitions. The temperature extremes equal or slightly exceed expected temperatures
for the acceptance test and exceed expected temperatures by a margin (typically 11 "'c)
for the qualification test Sometimes, the thermal-vacuum qualification test may
include a cold soak to demonstrate survival at low temperatures. Figure 12-4 shows a
typical temperature cycle.

i"I...

CompOnent AccepIance
10~ grmsOverall

0.01

12.4

60
40

0.0001

I

I

10

100

1,000

10,000

Frequency (Hz)

Rg.12-2. V1braUon Levels for Components on Ute AUas-centaur.Component qualification
vibration levels are specified by a power density spectrum which Is higher than th
e~spectrum.
e

II""' mT___

1,000

S

,

~

-20

10
1,000

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Rg.12-4. Typical Temperature Cycle for Thermal-Vacuum Test of Components. The key
issues on the thermal-vacuum test are temperature extremes, pressure level and
number of cycles necessary.

Expected Level

/V

100

0

E

TIme (hrs)

V
100

t

0

N

l

20

e

~

~~~~

f

~

-40

10,000

f

6'

10,000

Frequency (Hz)

Rg.12-3. Shock Levels for an AUas-centaur DevIce. Qualification levels are desIgned to be
greater than the expected design levels.

Component temperature requirements derive from the spacecraft's thermal des·
To test a c~m~nent under thermal vacuum, we mount it to a temperature-controrl:i
base plate lDSld~ a vacu~ ch~ber. The ~acuum chamber's walls have thermal
shrouds for cooling or heating. Usmg conductive coupling to the base plate and radia-

We do not always know what a spacecraft "component" is. For example, we may
defme the solar array and individual antennas as components and qualify them separately, or we may test them environmentally as a part of the complete spacecraft. The
structure is tested by static loading but receives its environmental exposure as a part
of the spacecraft. Mechanical assemblies, such as deployment joints or hinges, may be
tested at qualification environmental levels separately as components or as part of the
spacecraft.
The qualification program should evaluate each spacecraft function and all
environmental effects the spacecraft may encounter. Table 12-8 lists the steps for
designing a qualification program. FlfSt, we must prepare a list of all spacecraft and
payload functions, as well as equipment (including redundancy), all modes of 0p:eration (including failure modes and backups), and software code. The system and
subsystem specifications should provide this information. Second, we identify environmental effects, including those on the launch vehicle (acoustics, vibration, and
shock) and in orbit (temperature, vacuum, and radiation). Third, we check to see which
spacecraft functions must be tested with each environment Fourth, we identify the
major spacecraft configurations that require qualification, typically including a boost

r
t!

Spacecraft Manufacture and Test

528

12.4

configuration and one or more on-orbit configurations. Fifth, we devise functional
t~ts for each of these major configurations which completely evaluate the spacecraft.
~IXth? we layout the sequence of tests and environmental exposures. Finally, we must
Identify program span time and test equipment requirements.
TABLE 12-8. Steps In the Design of a Spacecraft Qualfficatlon Program. This is a typical
approach for a high rellabHity program.

1. identify Spacecraft
and Payload Functions

Test each spacecraft and payload function for proper
operation. Identify the top functional requirements of the
spacecraft In the top system specification, and glean
subsystem functions from the subsystem specifications.

2. Identify Environments

Environments for transportation and storage, launch, and
orbit include vibration, shock, temperature vacuum and
radiation.
'
,

3. Correlate Functions
and Environments

Duri~ transportation the spacecraft is off, although
sensitive c:omponents may be powered. During launch,
some equIPment WiD be In standby and some Will be
operating. Test the operating equipment during spacecraft
vibration and check all modes of on-orbit operation.

4. Identify Main
Configurations

Include boost configuration and one or more orbital
configurations.

5. Devise Functional Tests for

Test each function appropriate to a particular configuration
'
Including all equipment and software.

each Major Configuration

6. Lay Out the Sequence of
Functional Tests and
Environmental Exposures

See FIQ. 12-5 for a typical sequence.

7. Identify Span Times and
Special Facility Requirements

Some ~acecraft functions are best demonstrated by testing a group of components
or assemblies under special conditions or with special test equipment or facilities
These desig~ verification tests (~ee Table 12-9) can even be run on nonflight (bread~
board or en~e~nng mode}) equlp~ent. They demonstrate proper equipment function
and allow.smplified functional testing at the spacecraft level. For instance, a closedloop trac!cing test helps us evaluate performance of an antenna pointing control sys!em. During spacecraft tes~ the antenna feed can be stimulated by RF signals simulatIng those encountered dunng the closed-loop test, thus simplifying the test setup and
conduct.
TABLE 12-9. Typical Design VerfficatJon Tests. These tests demonstrate functionality of
components, subsystems, and systems.
• Structural Tests
- Static loads test
- Modal survey

• Deployment Tests
- Solar array
-Antennas
- Experiment booms and appendages

• Separation Tests

• Antenna Tests
- Pattern tests
- Closed-loop tracking tests
• Attitude Control Tests
- Closed-loop functional tests

12.5

Spacecraft Qua1ification Test Flow

529

12.5 Spacecraft Qualification Test Flow
The qualification test of a spacecraft is a lengthy and demanding process. Besides
proving the design, it may also be the first chance to evaluate the entire spacecraft in
operation. Some parts of the qualification test may provide data to validate the engineering design and verify proper interaction of the equipment. Assembling the first
unit is particularly difficult because components are seldom available in the best sequence and unexpected interference and test peculiarities always occur. All operations
must be planned and executed under control and quality surveillance. Records must be
maintained and the results of each integration and test step reviewed before proceeding
to the next operation. Typically, tests to qualify a spacecraft last more than a year.
Spacecraft integration normally starts with delivery of an assembled structure or
strueturaI frame. Liquid propulsion parts are assembled to the structure first because
the fields used to braze them together are not compatible with electronic components.
The spacecraft wiring harness can go on before or after the propulsion components.
Electronic assembly of the spacecraft commonly starts with electric power and
command and data handling subsystem components. Integration of the remaining subsystems depends more on the particular design. Although the subsystems may have
been preassembled and functionally teste'd, it is more common to integrate components one at a time and test the subsystems after they are integrated on the spacecraft.
To test a spacecraft, a crew normally uses central control and display equipment,
with a computer for command generation, telemetry decoding, logging, display, and
automated test sequences. They operate the equipment by keyboard and monitor status
by video displays. These displays typically consist of an event screen that shows all
signal activity and page displays devoted to particular subsystem parameters. The test
set also provides stimuli and data-measurement equipment for end-to-end testing of
the spacecraft and payload subsystems. A complete spacecraft test may take several
days to run and involve subroutines for each subsystem or functional group. Such a
test is called an integrated system test (1ST) or a comprehensive system test (CST). It.
uses subroutines that test each subsystem, so we need to rerun only the subroutine for
a subsystem anomaly. We may also use a short version of this functional test at selected points in the integration flow.
The qualification test sequence normally matches the expected flight sequence:
vibration, shock, and thermal vacuum. We also configure the spacecraft to match the
operational sequence by folding the solar array and deployables during vibration test
and deploying or removing them during thermal vacuum. Often the test facilities will
limit the test article's size or the ability to perform particular tests. Figure 12-5 shows
a typical sequence along with the special test facilities used [Reeves, 1979]. Frrst, the
mechanically integrated spacecraft goes through temperature cycling to verify proper
assembly. A comprehensive system test and performance testing of the payload then
take place in a special test facility. (For a communications satellite, this might be an
anechoic chamber or screen room.) Separate performance testing of the solar arrays
precedes their integration with the spacecraft. Vibration tests consist of acoustic
testing and vibration by low-frequency sine waves. The system must also pass a pyroshock test-firing of the deployment ordnance-and a check of the mechanical
deployments. Once the deployables are restowed, a thermal vacuum test of the folded
configuration follows. After demonstrating the deployments again, the test crew then
removes the deployables so the spacecraft will fit into the thermal vacuum (TV)
chamber. The spacecraft is then thermal vacuum tested in its orbital configuration. The

r~

Spacecraft Manufacture and Test

530

12.6

531

Launch Site Operations

12.6

I

deployable units are tested in parallel With the spacecraft. An ambient comprehensive
system test and mechanical verification series complete the qualification. Integrated
system tests (shorter functional tests) supplement this sequence between each environmental exposure and during TV test.

InstaD Solar-Array

• Receiving Inspecl!on

Ordnance

• Test propulsion
• Check for Leaks

AKM Readiness Test

EAGE Validation
• MechanIca!Iy IntegJate
the Spamcraft
• Assemble Structure
• \ntegTate Propulsion

• InstaD E1ec1ron1cs

• Comprehar1sIv& System
Test
• Test of aD SysIems WhIle
ThermaDy cycJing
• Temperature Chamber

• VIbration Test

InstaD Solar Array
and DepIoyabJes

• Low Frequency Sine
Waves Sweep
• AoousIIc Test at
Quallllcalion Level
• AoousIIc Chamber

• Thermal Vacuum Test
In Launch ConfIguration

• Deployable Release Test
• Rre Release Devices
and Verily Rrat Motion

·TVChamber

Remove Solar Array
and DeployabJes

• Thermal Vacuum Test
In 0IbIIaI ConfIguration

InstaDAKM

- Load Propellant
• InstaD Separation

• Encapsulate Shroud

• Transport to Launch Pad

OrdnanCe

CheckMating

and Interfaces

• Charge Battery
-Test SpeceCraIt Functions
on Stand
.1bp off Battery

Countdown and Launch

Rg.12-6. TypIcal launch-Site Activities. The time required for launch site activity may vary

from several months to several days.

·TVChamber

• Solar" Array Test
• Rash Chamber

Fig. 12-5. TypIcal Flow of Qualmcatlon Test. Note that system tests are performed after each
major activity.

During the qualification sequence, the test Crew records all anomalies or out-oftolerance measurements and formally resolves each discrepancy. Anomalies which
result from operator error or malfunctioning test equipment and which do not damage
!he ~~ are easy to resolve. But spacecraft malfunctions demand thorough
mvestigation. If design errors have caused the problems, the design must be corrected
and retested. T~t ~es normall~ require rerun of an integrated system test (or all
affected subroutines) if any electncal, pneumatic, or hydraulic lines are disconnected.

Normally, one of the launch-site test hangars houses the spacecraft test set for
performance testing nearby. Crews install propulsion in an explosive ordnance area.
They mate the launch vehicle and spacecraft. load propellant, and install ordnance on
stand. Trained people conduct these hazardous tasks, using appropriate equipment and
safeguards. Some spacecraft components can be replaced at the launch site and even
on stand, but restricted access to the spacecraft usually makes replacement difficult.
Much time at the launch site goes simply to monitoring the spacecraft's state of health
through hard-line connections or, during some integrated tests, through RF Jinks.
Spacecraft commanding is strictly controlled. Launch procedures include configuring
the spacecraft for launch and removing hard lines.

References
General Dynamics Space Systems Division. 1988. Atlas 11 DoD User's Mission Planning Guide. San Diego, CA: General Dynamics Space Systems Division.

12.6 Launch Site Operations

Reeves, Emery I. 1979. FLTSATCOM Case Study in Spacecraft Design. AIAA
Professional Study Series. TRW Report 26700-100-054-01.

~pacecraft travel either by air or on air-cushioned trailers. Crews record vibration
durmg ~sport, ~d ~ecraft packaging conforms to the specified environment.
Lau.nch-slte operations mclude installing and validating the test equipment (EAGE)
tes~g the spacecraft's performance, installing propulsion (AKM),loading propellan~
mating th~ spa~ to its launch vehicle, installing ordnance, and monitoring. Crews
may al~ ms~l !light batteries at the launch site. Figure 12-6 shows a typical flow of
launch-SIte actiVIties.

U.S. Air Force Rome Air Development Center. 1986. Mil.. Handbook 217E. Reliability Prediction of Electronic Equipment. Griffiss AFB, NY: U.S. Air Force Rome
Air Development Center.
U.S. Air Force Standardization Office. 1985. MIL Std 1521B. Technical Reviews and
Audits for Systems, Equipments, and Computer Software. Hanscomb AFB, MA:
u.s. Air Force Standardization Office.

532

Spacecraft Manufacture and Test

12.6

U.S. Army Annament Research Development and Engineering Center. 1978. MIL Std
480A. Configuration Control-Engineering Changes, Deviations, and Waivers.

Chapter 13

- - . 1983. DOD Std IOOC. Engineering Drawing Practices. Picatinny Arsenal,
NJ: U.S. Army Armament Research Development and Engineering Center.
- - . 1985. MIL Q 9858A. Quality Program Requirements.
- - . 1985. MIL Std 483A. Configuration Management Practices for Systems,
Equipment, Munitions, and Computer Programs.
- - - . 1985. MIL Std 490. Specification Practices.
U.S. Army Missile Command. 1987. FED Std 209C. Federal Standard Clean Room
and Workstation Requirements, Controlled Environment. Redstone Arsenal, AL:
U.S. Army Missile Command.

Communications Architecture
Fred J. Dietrich, Globalstar L.P.
Richard S. Davies, Stanford Telecommunications, Inc.
13.1

13.2
13.3

13.4
13.5

Communications Architecture

Communications Architecture Defined by SatelliteGround Station Geometry; Communications
Architecture Defined by Function; Criteria/or
Selecting Communications Architecture
Data Rates
7T&C; Data Collection; Data Relay
Link Design
Derivation 0/ link Equation; Link Design
Equations; Modulation and Coding; Atmospheric
and Rain Attenuation; Frequency Selection;
link Budgets
Sizing the Communications Payload
Special Topics

Multiple Access: Sharing Communication links;
Payloads with Onboard Processing; Antijam
Techniques; Security; Diversity Techniques;
Optical Links

A communications architecture is the arrangement, or configuration, of satellites
and ground stations in a space system, and the network of communication links that
transfers information between them. This chapter discusses this arrangement of links,
their operation, and their effect on system design. More detailed information on
satellite communications is available in Morgan and Gordon [1989] and Sklar [1988].
Table 13-1 lists the steps required to specify the communications architecture. The
first step is to define the mission objectives and requirements in enough detail to
evaluate and compare alternative architectures. Section 13.1 describes alternative
configurations and the criteria used in their selection.
The second step is to determine the data rates for each of the links identified in
step 1. To do this it is necessary that the required data throughput accuracy of data
transmission be specified. and whether or not there will be data processing on board
the satellite. This process is described in Sec. 13.2.
The third step is to design each link in the network, as explained in Sec. 133.
Principal factors are the availability of a radio frequency spectrum, coverage area of
the satellite antenna beam. and path length between satellite and ground station. These

533

Communications Architecture

534

13.1

TABLE 13-1. Specifying a Communications Architecture. Evaluating alternative architectures may require designing the links and sizing the communication payload as
described In Table 13-9.

Process (= ~talled Step)

Step
1. Identify Communication
Requirements

2. Specify Alternate
Communications
Architectures
3. Determine Data Rates
for Each link

Reference

• Develop mission data flow diagram based on Sec. 2.1
mission requirements
Chap. 4
• Specify:
- Data sourcas, data end users, & locations
- Quantity of data per unit time
- Access time
- Transmission delay
- AvaliabDIty, reilabDity
• identify links and ground station locations
• Consider use of relay satenltes and relay
ground stations
• Determine data procasslng location

Rg.13-2
Rg. 13-2

• Determine sampling rates, quantization
levels
• Specify bits per sample

Sec. 9.5.1
Sec. 13.2

4. Design & Size Each Unk • Evaluate a1tematives and compara

Sec. 2.1

Table 13-4
Tables 13-2,13-9

5. Document Reasons
for Selection

factors in turn determine antenna size and transmitter powel'-the major cost drivers
in sizing the space system. The fourth step, described in Sec.J3.4, provides information to aid the reader in estimating the size and mass of the satellite antennas, and
primary power and mass of the satellite transmitters. These parameters are inputs to
the spacecraft design process described in Chap. ] 0, and the ground system design
process described in Chap. ]5.

13.1 Communications Architecture
A communications architecture is a network of satellites and ground stations
interconnected by communication Jinks. The term ground station is equivaJent to
Earth station, ground terminal, and Earth terminal, including land mobile, airborne,
and shipborne terminals. All of these names refer to the same thing: the antenna, transmitter, receiver, and control equipment required to communicate with the satellite.
Communication Jinks allow a sateUite system to function by carrying tracking,
telemetry, and command data or mission data between its elements. Figure 13-1
illustrates the ground station-to-satellite uplinks, sateJ1ite-to-ground station downlinks,
and satellite-to-satellite crosslinks, or intersatellite links, that support a space system.
Not shown are additional communication links which may be necessary to transfer
data between the ground stations and a mission control center or users. For example,
the Air Force's Satellite Control Network uses the DSCS-ID communications satellite
to relay data between remote tracking stations and the satellite control facility in
California.
In space systems, the transmitter and receiver must be in view of each other, using
frequencies high enough (above 100 MHz) to easily penetrate the Earth's ionosphere.

535

Communications Architecture

13.1

A satellite in a nongeostationary orbit is often out of view of its user's ground station.
In this case a second satellite, usually in a ~eostationary orbit, ~y be ~ to ~Ia!
d ta between the sateUite and its ground station. The ground station-to-satellite link IS
; forward link. and the satellite-to-ground station Jink is the return link. As shown in
figure, both the forward and return Jinks contain upJinks, downJinks, and

th:

crossHnks•
CrossIlnks or
IntersataDlte
Unks Relay
Retum Unk
Satellite

Relay

Sansor
Satellite

11.

Satellite

ForwardUnk

Return

Retum
Unk

....
--\T
~;~\::: \4:-

Unk

Relay

Forward
link

SateUlte

o

Unk

1\,--

T --

I
\
0
\\--I---:1I---'lI=-~-~~

--

~Ground

n&c = Tracking, TelemetJy &Control

Stations

Rg.13-1. The Communications ArchItectUre Conslste of Satellites and Ground StaUons
Interconnected with Communications Unks.

Since 1990 several new classes of satellites in the orbital category of low-Earth
orbit (LEO) ~d medium-Earth orbit (MEO) have been developed for various commercial uses. They will be used for both satellite-based cellular telephone service as
well as for wideband data trunking (fiber optic type service where there is no fiber)
and data distribution for Internet-type services.
In these new systems, the terms forward link and return link sometimes take on new
definitions. As in terrestrial cellular, the forward link for a satellite-based cell~ar
system is from the ground station (gateway) to the user terminal ~ or radiC?"
telephone, and the return link is from the radiotelephone to the ground station. In this
terminology, both the forward and return links contain uplinks and downlinks to and
from the satellite.
.
A constellation at an altitude of 1,000-1,500 Ian typicaIJy requires from 48 to 64
satellites to provide complete Earth coverage. A constellation at 10,000 Ian typicaIJy
requires 12 satellites.

13.1.1 Communications Arcbitectore Defined by Satellite-Ground
Station Geometry
The geometry formed by sateJ1ite orbits and ground stations de~nes th~ b~c
communications architectures illustrated in Fig. 13-2. Table 13-2 lists the pnnClpaJ
advantages and disadvantages of each.

536

Communications Architecture

13.1

13.1

Communications Arcbitecture

537

TABLE 13-2. Comparison of five Example Communications Architecture.
Architecture

Advantages

• Low-cost launch
SIngle Satellite, • Low-cost satelfite
Store & Forward • Polar coverage with IncDned orbit

A. Low·Altitude,

• No switching between satellites
• Ground station antenna tracking
often not required

•
•
•
•
•

C.Molniya
Orbit

• Provides coverage of
polar region
• Low-cost launch per satellite

• Requires sevaral sateDites for
continuous coverege of one
hemisphere
• Need for ground station antenna
pointing and satellite handover
• Network control more complax
• Need for stationkeeping

D. Geostationary
Orbit with
Crosslink

• Communication over greater distance
without intermediate ground-station
relay
• Reduced propagation delay
• No ground stations in foreign territory:
-Increased security
- Reduced cost

• Higher satellite complexity
and cost
• Need for statlonkeeplng
• Relay satellite and launch costs
• No coverage of polar regions

E. Low-Altitude
Multiple
Satellites
with CrossJinks

• Highly survivab~ultiple paths
• Reduced jamming susceptibility
due to limited Earth view area
• Reduced transmitter power
due to low altitude
• Low-cost launch per satellite
• Polar coverage with inclined orbit

• Complex link acquisition ground
station (antenna pointing,
frequency, time)
• Complex dynamic network
control
• Many satellites required for
high link avatlability

D. Crass\Ink In Communication
SaIeIIIIe System

E. Low-al!llude. Crosslinked Comsat NeIwOJk

F1g.13-2. Typical Communications Architectures Used to SatIsfy DIfferent Mission
Requirements. Table 13-2 summarizes the cheracterlstics of each architecture.

Store and Forward (Fig. 13-2A): The architecture for relaying communications by
satellite appeared in 1960, when the U.S. Army launched the Courier satellite [Mott.
ley, 1960]. In this configuration, the satellite orbits at low altitude (under 1,000 km),
receives data. and stores it in memory. When it moves in view of a receiver ground
station, the satellite transmits the stored data. This architecture permits the use of a
low-cost launch vehicle due to the low-altitude orbit. The satellite cost is also lower

• Long message access time
and transmission delay
(up to several hours)

B. Geostationary
Orbit
A. Store and Forward

C. MoInIya OrbIt

Disadvantages

Hlgh-cost launch
Hlgh-cost satenlte
Need for statlonkeeping
Propagation delay
No coverage of polar regions

due to the wider antenna beamwidth required to illuminate the Earth, which reduces
the satellite antenna size and stabilization requirement. Usually satellite stationkeeping is not required. The principal disadvantage of this architecture is its long access
time and transmission delay, perhaps hours, waiting for the satellite to pass into view
of the user ground station.
There are several commercial systems planning to use store-and-forward communication for very low-cost service. They include ORBCOMM, Starsys, Vita. LEO-I,
FAI, and ESat. They typically operate in the VHF portion of the radio spectrum at very
low bandwidths. These are sometimes referred to as "little LEOs."
Geostationary Orbit (Fig. 13-2B): Virtually all communication relay satellite
systems and many meteorologicaI satellites use this architecture, in which the satellite
is placed in a near-zero deg inclination orbit at 35,786 kIn altitude. The period of the
orbit is exactly equal to the period of the Earth's rotation, making the satellite ~~
stationary when viewed from the ground (see Sec. 6.1). The cost of ~~d stations ~s
usually less for this architecture because little or no antenna pomting control IS

I

[1
538

Communications Arcbiteetore

13.1

required. A stationary network is far easier to set up, monitor, and control compared
to a dynamic network containing nonstationary (relative to Earth) satellites. There is
no need to switch from one satellite to another, for the satellite is always in view of the
ground station. Principal disadvantages are lack of coverage above 70-deg latitude and
the high launch cost Furthermore, the delay time for propagation to and from the
synchronous orbit is about 0.25 sec, which sometimes causes problems (echoes,
acknowledgment protocols) in communications satellite systems.
Molniya Orbit (Fig. 13-2C): The Russian space program uses this architecture to
cover the northern polar regions. The satellites are in highly elliptical orbits with an
apogee of 40,000 km, a perigee of 500 km, and an inclination angle of 63.4 deg (see
Sec. 6.1). The apogee is over the North Pole to cover northern latitudes. The period of
the orbit is 12 hr, but because it is highly elliptical, the satellite spends about 8 hr of
each period over the northern hemisphere. Two or more satellites orbit in different
planes, phased so that at least one is always in view from all northern latitudes.
Unfortunately, the Molniya orbit requires continuous changing of antenna pointing
angles at the ground station and switching links between satellites as they move in and
out of view.
Geostationary Orbit with Crosslink (Fig. 13-20): When a geostationary satellite is
beyond line-of-sight of a ground station, a second geostationary satellite relays data
between it and the station. A relay satellite is better than a double-hop link using two
adjacent ground stations as a relay (shown in Fig. 13-2B), because the relay ground
stations must often be on foreign territory, which is more costly, less secure, and less
survivable. The obvious disadvantage of this architecture is the added relay satellite
and its crosslink, which increase the system's complexity, risk, and cost.
Low ATtitude (Fig. 13-2E): This architecture places 20 or more satellites in lowaltitude (500 to 3,000 km) orbits and sometimes connects them with crosslinks. The
system divides digital messages into packets of a few hundred or thousand bits, labels
each packet with time-of-day and its destination, and then transmits it in a short burst.
Packets may arrive by different paths with different propagation times, depending on
the satellite-ground station geometry at the time of transmission. The receiving station
must sort and reassemble the packets in the correct order to obtain the original message. Because so many alternate paths are available, the system is highly survivable.
The low-altitude orbit also improves immunity to jamming from the ground since the
satellite sees a smaller Earth area. Finally, the uplink transmitter power is lower due to
the shorter distance between ground station and satellite, making unauthorized reception less probable. On the other hand, this architecture needs complex network
synchronizing and control functions because of relative motion between satellites and
ground stations. Without stationkeeping, the satellites may drift together in bunches,
leaving gaps in the coverage which lead to significant link outages.
Note: The satellite-based cellular telephone service mentioned in paragraph 13.1
and Table 13-2 and below do not use packet transmission as described above, but typically CDMA or TDMA waveforms.
There are several classes of nongeostationary, low- and medium-altitude satellites
Which have begun to appear since about 1990. These are:

• Low-Earth Orbit (LEO) Cellular Satellites. These are the systems such as
Iridium, Globalstar, and Ellipso which provide cellular telephone-type service
to hand-held and mobile phones from the low-Earth orbits.

13.1

Communications Architecture

• Little Low-Earth Orbit (Little LEO) Satellites. These satellites,

539
incIudin~

StarSys, Vita, LEO-t, F AI, and ESat, are commercial, low-powered, 10W:OrbIt
satellites intended for store-and-forward communication at a very low pnce at
VHF frequencies.

• Medium-Orbit (MEO) Satellites. These include ICO, Star Lynx, Pentriad,
Ellipsat, and TRW Global EHF Sa~llite Network. They provide cellular as
well as high-speed data transfer ServIce.

• Low-Earth Orbit (LEO) Data Satellites (also called "Big LEOs"). These
include Teledesic, Boeing's Aeronautical Radio Navigation, Globalstar ~S40, and Iridium Macrocell. These satellites will provide digital data trunking
as well as Internet access to many users.
Other architectures may meet particul:rr missi?n req~ments. For exam~le,
Chapell [1987] suggests a hybrid system which contains satellites at both low ~d high
altitudes thus combining their advantages. Lee [1988] compares ~ architec~
fi providing regional communications satellite service to the continental Umted
S~tes These architectures contain four geostationary satellites, which are either
isola~, interconnected by double-hop ground stations, or interconnected by

cr~~ystems combine geostationary and low-Earth orbit satellites. Alcatel's S~­

bridge combined with Loral's Cyberstar and Globalsoo:'s GS-2 syste~ both com~me
low-Earth orbit satellites for primary customer connection and geostationary satelli~
to act as relays between LEOs, as well as connecting to some cus~om~rs. The se:nce
is typically data services such as Internet connectivity. Intersatellite li~ are WIdely
used both between low-Earth orbit satellites and between low-Earth orbit and geostationary satellites in order to perform the required communication functions.

13.1.2 Communications Architecture Defined by Function
Three types of communications architectures, shown in ~g. 13-3,. are trackin~,
telemetry, and command; data collection; an~ data relay. A pomt-to:-pomt network. IS
used to provide a link to a single ground station. The broadcas~ archi~ecture trans~ts
data to multiple ground stations located in different areas. This archi~ture n:cI~
either a broad-beam satellite antenna, a narrow-beam antenna mpIdly s~~hing
between ground stations, or a mul~beam antenna (see Sec:. 13.4). In commumcationssatellite applications, the satellIte network control 18. ~ften part of a larger
telecommunications network containing thousands or millIons of users. Thus the
satellites may be shared among many nonsimultaneous users, using multiple-access
techniques described in Sec. 13.5 (see Chap. 2 of Morgan and Gordon [1989])..
The satellite communications architecture may be affected by data processmg on
board the satellite. Usually data collected by a satellite is transmitted direct!y to the
user via the downlink. However, the data often requires processing to make it ~ful.
If the system contains many ground stations, processiJ;lg the data in the sate~te and
then transmitting it may be more economical than hav!ng each user process.lt separately. This processing often reduces the data mte, l~din~ to furth~r cost savmgs (~
Sec.13.2). A satellite system using onboard processmg IS Europe s Meteosat, w~ch
stores and formats cloud-scanner data before transmitting it to several ground stations
at a reduced data mte.

Communications Architecture

S40

Data Dissemination Architecture

satellite
Function

Tracking
TeJemetJy
&Comrnand

Polnt-tl>Polnt

i/'
£(1 {IOR

0='

. TT&C data Is transmIHed
betwean the sateDIte and

Broadcast

/~~.
..

~

A relay sateDHe
can provide broadcast
TT&C service to
rnuItIple sateUltes.

ground station, either directly
or by a relay sateDite.

Data

-;

\

/!\
<p )j

~

~ ~

CoOectfon

SateUlte sensors collect.data
and transmit It to single ground
station direcUy or by relay station.

o

Data
Relay

13.1

OR

SatelDte sensors coUect
data and broadcast It to
multiple ground stations.

O-r •/I\~

/\'1 ~
Data-relay sateDHes relay
data originating on ground
or In another sateDite to
single ground station.

---~O

~

cp<p)j

Communications Arcbitecture

13.1

ticipated requirements, and the satellite itself is more complex, more costly, and
potentially less reliable. Even when using an autonomous control architecture, a
ground station is generally required to collect data from the spacecraft and to serve as
a backup to the onboard control system.
UsuaIly, ground stations control unmanned satellites to simplify the satellite
design. In the future we expect more functions, such as stationkeeping, to be
performed in the satellite to reduce the dependence on the ground station control (see

Sec. 16.1).
During the operation of a satellite system, the communication links may need to be
reconfigured, or its parameters, such as power or bandwidth, adjusted to accommodate
a change in requirements. The process for doing this is called network control.
communications architectures may require a number of control functions
(Table 13-3). Early satellites, such as Sputnik, did not need these functions because
their systems used only one satellite, a single satellite-to-ground link, and a broadbeam
antenna. .On the other hand, a communications satellite system such as the NASA
ACfS [Naderi and Kelly, 1988] contains many narrowbeam satellite antennas with
demodulators and switching circuits. This architecture requires a sophisticated system
for network control. Network control can be centralized using a single ground station
or satellite, or distributed with multiple ground stations or satellites. Distributed configurations use a control hierarchy, or set of priorities, to avoid conflicts. Distributed
control makes the network less vulnerable to failure of a single control element (see
Chap. 14 for further details).
TABLE 13-3. Network Control Functions.

Operators at ground (air, ship) stations usually control the mission in (near) real
time by transmitting commands to the satellite. When the satellite is not in view of the
ground-control station during part of its orbit, commands previously received and
stored in the satellite are executed by an onboard timer. The advantages of this
approach are flexibility to changing requirements, greater reliability, and a less
complex, lower-cost satellite. The disadvantages are vulnerability to human error or
failure of the ground control facility. Costs for the ground control segment, especially
operations, can be high.
On the other hand, the satellite itself can control a mission by using onboard datasensing and programmed decision-making processes. This arrangement replaces
ground control, is highly survivable, has fast response time (communication link
delays eIiminated), excludes errors iptroduced by human operators, and reduces
ground equipment and operations cost. But it is less responsive to changing or unan-

Example

Function

Resource Allocation

Frequency chSnnel, bandwidth assignment
Time slot assignment
Date rate assignment
Modulation/coding assignment
Antenna beam assignment
Transmitter power control
Crosslink assignment

Unk Acquisition

Antenna pointing
Frequency acquisition
Time acquisition
Acknowledgment protocols
Crypto synchronization

Performance Monitoring and
Redundancy Switching

Spectrum analysis
Signal-to-noise ratio reduction (due to rain, etc.)
Interference Identification
Fault identification
Redundancy switching
Realiocation of resources

Tlme/Frequency Standard

Provide universal time

Tracking, Telemetty,
and Command (TT&C)

Range, range-rate measurement
Command signal formatting, verification, execution
Telemetry signal demultiplexing, processing, display

Statlonkeeping

Ephemeris prediction
Thrust control

Data-relay sateDHe broadcasts
data originating on ground
or In another satellite to
multiple ground stations.

Fig. 13-3. Communications Architectures may be Defined by the Function Performed.
Open circles represent a relay satellite.

541

542

Communications Architecture

13.1

13.1.3 Criteria for Selecting Communications Architecture
Indivi~~ users ~ assign different priorities to the criteria for selecting a

commumcations architecture. For example, a commercial company will try to reduce
cost and risk, but the military may make survivability the top priority. The factors
which affect the criteria are explained below:
Orbit: The satellite orbit determines how much time the satellite is in view by the
ground station and the potential need for intersatellite links. The satellite altitude
determines the Earth coverage, and the satellite orbit determines the delay between
passes over a specified ground station. Together, orbit and altitude set the number of
satellites needed for a specified continuity of coverage (see Sec. 7.2). Transmitter
po,,:,er and antenna size depend on the distance between the satellites and the ground
s~ti~ns (see Sec. 13.3). Satellite view time determines the signal-acquisition and
nnsslOn-control complexity (see Chap. 14).
In the satellite-cellular systems described above, intersatellite links are not necessarily used. Instead, the constellation is designed so that at least one satellite is in view
by the ~teway and every user at all times, so that there are no "outages." Coverage is
deternnned by the number of satellites, the inclination of their orbits, the latitude of the
gateway and user, and the number of gateways located around the world, if intersatellite links are not used.
If intersatellite links are used, then the number of gateways and their location
~omes ~uc~ less cri~cal, as many satelli~ can connect to a single gateway through
mtersatellite links. Vanous systems proceeding now have used different philosophies
with respect to intersatellite links, which can have great effect on the capital cost of the
system. Intersatellite links make the satellites more expensive, but eliminate the need
for many fairly expensive ground stations (gateways), for example.
There are many systems proposed in various frequency bands which use not only
the geostationary orbit, the low-Earth orbit discussed above, and also what is called a
medium-Earth orbit (MEO), which ranges in altitude from about 10,000 to 20,000 km.
These are typically inclined with respect to the equator as the LEOs are, and can
address users with small, hand-held UTs, but can see a much larger portion of the Earth
at one time, so that only 10 or 12 of them are required to give nearly complete Earth
coverage.
RF Spectrum: The RF carrier frequency affects the satellite and ground station
ttansmitter power, antenna size and beamwidth, and requirements for satellite stabilization. In tum, these factors affect satellite size, mass, and complexity. The carrier
frequency also determines the transmitter power needed to overcome rain attenuation
(~Sec. 13.3). Finally, it is necessary to apply for and receive permission to use an
asSigned frequency from a regulatory agency such as the International Telecommunication Union, the Federal Communications Commission, or the Department of
Defense's Interdepartmental Radio Advisory Committee, and every nation's regulatory
agency. These agencies also allocate orbit slots for geostationary satellites (Chap. 21).
Data Rate: The data rate is proportional to the quantity of information per unit time
ttansferred between the satellite and ground station (see Sec. 13.2). The higher the data
rate, the larger the transmitter power and antenna size required (Sec. 13.3). Processing
the sp~ce~-gen.erated data on board the satellite reduces the data rate without losing
essentialmformation, but makes the satellite more complex (see Sec. 13.2).
Duty Factor: The fraction of time needed for operation of a satellite link is the duty
factor, which is a function of the mission and the satellite orbit A low duty factor

13.2

Data Rates

543

enables a single ground station to support more than one satellite (usually the case for
telemetry and command). Alternatively, several users may share a single satellite link
(see Sec. 13.5).
In the case of LEOs used for cellular service, one gateway will typically have
several antennas communicating simultaneously with several satellites; each of which
may be carrying 1,000 or more individual circuits. In this case, the ground station duty
factor will be nearly 100% as antennas switch from satellite to satellite; the UT use
factor will be quite small, however, as is the use of a telephone.
Link Availobility: Link availability is the time the link is available to the user
divided by the total time that it theoretically could be available. It depends on equipment reliability, use of redundant equipment, time required to repair equipment, ontages caused by rain, and use of alternate links. Typical goals for link aVailability range
from 0.99 to 0.9999, the latter value applying to commercial telephone networks. (See
Chap. 19 for a discussion of reliability.)
Link Access Tune: The maximum allowable link access time, or time users have to
wait before they get their link, depends on the mission. For example, we usually
demand access to a voice circuit in seconds. Meteorological data is needed in less than
an hour to be useful in weather forecasting. On the other hand, X-ray data from a
scientific satellite can be stored and transmitted later. Tracking, telemetry, and
command links are often required in near real-time (a few seconds), especUIlly if a
problem requires an immediate response from the satellite-control operator. Link
access time depends strongly on orbit selection, which determines when a Satellite is
in view of the ground station. Note that a real-time response is impossible for deep
space missions, because the radio propagation time is minutes or hours long.
Threat: Various kinds of threats may influence system design. For military
applications, choices of frequency, antenna, modulation, and link margin need to be
evaluated for susceptibility to jamming. At the same time, a high-altitude nuclear
detonation can disturb the propagation of radio signals. A physical threat to the
satellite might dictate multiple satellites or a hardened design (see Chap. 8). A physical.
threat to a ground station might demand a data-relay satellite with crosslinks to allow
the ground station to be relocated in safe territory.
The FireSat sample mission uses low-altitude satellites with limited coverage. If a
ground station is near the forest area under surveillance, a store-and-forward or
crosslink architecture is not required. The communications architecture is then simply
a single satellite operating when in view of its ground station. A separate groumd
station is required for each major area under surveillance.

13.2 Data Rates
In designing a communications architecture for space missions, we must ask: what
is the information to be transferred over our communication links? How fast must the

transfer rate be? Keeping in mind that higher rates of data transmission mean higher
system costs, we need to decide how we will transfer information to the user.
Satellite links originally used analog modulation techniques to apply the data onto
the RF carrier for transmission over the link. Since 1980, however, most space-ground
communication links use digital modulation. To implement a digital system, we must
fIrst sample the amplitude of the analog signal at a rate equal to at least twice the highest frequency in the signal spectrum,fm. In 1928 Nyquist" showed that if we meet this

Communications Architecture

544

13.2

condition we can theoretically reconstruct the original analog signal from the samples
(see Sklar [1988], Sec. 2.4). For example, the normal human voice has a frequency
spectrum range of about 3.5 kHz. Thus, to reproduce it digitally, the sampling rate
must be at least 7,000 samples!sec. However, practical considerations, such as realizable filter limitations, suggest that the sampling frequency should be at least 2.2 times
the maximum input frequency [Sklar, 1988]:

is?:.

2.2fm

(13-1)

Using Eq. (13-1), our 3.5-kHz voice signal must be sampled at a rate of
7.7 ksamples!s. In fact, the sampling rate of commercial digitized voice systems is
8 ksamples!s. Another example is the sampling rate of the audio compact disc player
which is 44.1 ksamples/s-about 2.2 times 20 kHz, the maximum source frequency of
interest for high-quality music.
The analog amplitude sample is next converted to a digitized word composed of a
series of bits. Consider the analog-to-digital convener process illustrated in Fig. 13-4,
where three bits designate one of eight amplitude levels. For example, a 6.3 V amplitude converts to a 3-bit wor~110. At the receiver, a digital-to-analog converter
converts this word according to the algorithm 22 + 21 + ()O + 0.5 =6.5 V, leaving a
quantization error of 0.2 V. This quantization error can be reduced by increasing the
number of bits in the word.
8
111

7

/

110

c

6

gil.

101

P
a,;;

100

~!

!!
-0

011

6

010

!",0
-

i

5

0

~4

!03
2

001
000
0

~

~

~

~

r

~

~
~

+

t

Quanllzallon
Error for Input
Voltage of 6.3

Vpp

~~

t

1

2345678

Input Voltage

Ag. 13-4. Example of Analog-ta-Dlgltal Conversion for 8 Quantization Levels (3 bits).

The analog-to-digital converter divides the total amplitude range of the input
sample int() M quantizing levels, where M =2n, and n is the number of bits per sample.
Assuming a uniform spacing of quantization levels. the maximum quantization error
is iO.5 AV where AV is the quantization step size, equal to ~p / M =Vpp /2 n , where
Vpp is the full-scale input signal voltage.
• Harry Nyquist set the stage for modern digital communications with his classic paper, "Certain Topics on Telegraph Transmission Theory," published in the Transactions 0/ American
Institute o/Electrical Engineers in 1928 (vol. 47, pp. 617-644).

Data Rates

13.2

545

It can be shown [panter, 1965] that the mean-squared noise power due to quantization is (AV)2/12. The signal-to-quantization noise power ratio is (M2 - I), which
is approximately equal to M2 or 22n, ass~g a uniform distribution of the input
signal amplitudes over ~p. See Table 13-4.
TABLE 13-4. Required Bits Per Sample. The number of bits per sample Is determined by the .
maximum quantization error and quantization noise allowed.
Number of
Bits Per Sample

Maximum
Quantization Error
(%)

Signal Power to QuantIzaUon
Noise Power Ratio·
(dB)

3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

625
3.13
1.56
0.79
0.39
0.20
0.10
0.05
0.02
0.01

18
24
30
36
42
48
54
60
66
72

• Assumes signal amplitudes and quantization errors are uniformly distributed.

The effect of quantization noise may be reduced by varying the size of the
quantization steps, with~ut adding to their n~ber: so as to provide smaller. steps f~r
weaker signals. For a gtven number of quantization levels, coarser quantization IS
applied near the peak of large signals, where the larger absolute errors are tolerable
because they are small compared to the larger signal amplitudes. These techniques are
commonly applied to voice transmission, where the speech waveform is compressed
at the transmitter end prior to digitization, and expanded at the receiver. Taken
together, the compressor and expander are called a compandor.
The number of bits per sample is determined by the mission requirements. The Jet
Propulsion Laboratory typically uses 256 shades of gray (i.e., n =8) in differentiating
voltages from its imaging sensors, and 32 (n = 5) is normally used for low-definition,
black-and-white TV transmission. The length of the digital word selected depends on
the precision one requires for the application. For example, we do not need this precision for satellite equipment temperatures, whereas scientific measurement may require
a highly precise data link, if justified by the sensor accuracy.
The data rate is the number of samples per second times the bits per sample, or the
number of bits per second, abbreviated bps. Thus a digitized voice circuit in a commercial telephone network requires 8 ksamples/s times 8 bits/sample for a·data rate of
64 kbps. Table 13-5 lists other examples.
The cellular-satellite systems are using methods for modulation, demodulation, and
forward error correction that greatly reduce the data rates needed for transmission. For
example, the Globalstar system uses code division multiple access with ReedSolomon coding for forward error correction and Viterbi decoding. It sends voice
through a variable-rate encoder/decoder at an average rate of 9.6 kb/s, and can reduce
to a 4.8, 2.4 or 1.2 kb/s rate under stress. These rates are much less than those discussed
above, and in Table 13-5, and represent new methods of coding digital data. With these
• In dB, the signal-to-quantization noise ratio is 6n. See Sec. 13.3 for the definition of dB.

w~
I

:, ,

Communications Architecture

13,2

TABLE 13-5. Bit Rate Required to Transmit Analog information Over a Digital Communi,
cation Unk. The bit rate of digitized, or pulse code modulated (PCM), voice can
be reduced by transmitting only the changes In amplitude between consecutive
samples. This technique Is known as Delta PCM.
Max Input
Freq.,tm

Analog
Information

Sampnng

Frequency
(SampJesls)

Voice (Delta PCM)

(Hz)
3,600
3,600

Cenu/ar Voice

4,800

Voice (PCM)

Number
Bits Per
Samplen

Data Rate R
(bps)

8,000

7

64k'

8,000

6

56k*

4,800

1

4.8k

DS1 Multiplexer
24 Voice Channels

-

1.544M

OrIginal P/cturephonfIiJ

900k

2M

3

6M

Color Television
(commercial quality)

4.0M

8.8M

5

44M

Color Television
(broadcast quality)

42M

9.25M

10

92.5M

.

After 1 bit per sample added for slgnaDlng and supervision.

new codes it is possible to achieve a bit error rate (BER) of about 10-10 at a bit energy
to incremental noise (Eb/No) ratio of only 5 dB.
Digital communication techniques are used instead of analog for a number of
reasons. Frrst, digital signals can more precisely transmit the data because they are less
susceptible to distortion and interference. Second, digital signals can be easily
regenerated so that noise and disturbances do not accumulate in transmission through
communication relays. Third, digital links can have extremely low error rates and high
~delity through error detection and correction. Also, multiple streams of digital
SignalS can be easily multiplexed as a single serial-bit stream onto a single RF carrier.
Other ~d~antages are easier communic~tion-l~ security and implementation by driftfree lD1D1ature, low-power hardware, mcluding microprocessors, digital switching
and larg~ sc~e integrated circuit chips; In this chapter we will consider only digitai
commumcations.
Using the form~as developed in Chap. 5, we can easily determine the relationship
between the quantity of data, D, the data rate, R, and the parameters for a single ground
station pass from Sec. 5.3.1. Specifically,
D = R(FTmJU - Tinitiote ) I M

F = (11 AmJU)

acos(COSAmJU

I cos Amin)

(13-2)

(13-3)
where Tmax is the maximum time in view (i.e., the pass duration when the satellite
passes directly overhead) from Eq. (5-52), Fis the fractional reduction in viewing time
due !D passing at an Earth central angle 'J..",m away from the ground station, Amm: is the
mBXlmum Earth central angle from Eq. (5-36), TinitioJe is the time required to initiate
a communica~ons pass, ~d M is ~ margin needed to account for missed passes due
to gro~d station down time, sharmg of groundtesources, transmission of other data,
or conflicts on board the satellite or within the communications process. A reasonable
value for TinitioJe is about 2 minutes. M is conservatively estimated at a value of 2 to 3
unless it is a dedicated ground station with a specified value for the percentage of pass

13.2

Data Rates

547

time that will be used for collecting data. For the fraction of time in view, we may wish
to use mean values rather than one for a specific ground station pass in Eq. (13-3). As
discussed in Sec. 5.3.1, the average value of F is about 80% for satellites in a circular
low-Earth orbit, and 86% or more of all passes will have F greater than 0.5.
With this background on digital techniques, we now consider the data rate requirements for the three types of architectures discussed in the previous section: telemetry,
tracking, and command (Tf&C); data collection; and data relay.

13.2.11T&C
The number and accuracy of functions being monitored in the satellite determines
the telemetry data rate. Several hundred functions such as voltages, temperatures, and
accelerations may require monitoring to determine if all satellite subsystems are
operating correctly, and, ifnot, to determine where a failure occurred. Sampling each
telemetry sensor in sequence with a multiplexer combines all telemetry data into a
single bit stream. The sampling rate is usually low, perhaps once every second or once
every 10 sec, because the monitored parameters vary slowly. For example, sup~se we
want to monitor 50 temperature sensors and 50 voltages once every 10 sec With an
accuracy of 1.5%. The data rate required is 100 samples per 10 sec times 5 bits per
sample, or 50 bps. Some applications require precise time or amplitude resolution of
the data. In these cases, the data may be transmitted in analog form by frequency modulation of one or more subcarriers [Morgan and Gordon, 1989].
The rate needed to transmit commands to a satellite is usually quite low--perhaps
only one per second. A command message may be 48 to 64 bits long, consisting of a
synchronizing preamble (a set series of bits), an address word that routes the command
to its satellite destination, the command itself (often a single on-off digit), and some
error detection bits to make sure the command was correctly receiVed. Some commands can cause irreversible functions or damage the satellite if performed at the
wrong time. These commands are usually first transmitted and stored in the satellite.
Correct reception by the satellite is verified by telemetry, after which a second command is transmitted to execute the function. If the command is to be executed later
when the satellite is out of the ground station's view, a time of execution is added to
the command word and stored in the satellite. The command is executed later when
the time contained in the command word coincides with the satellite's clock time.
To track a satellite, the ground station measures range or range rate for computing
and updating the orbit ephemeris. For example, the Air Force adds a one Mbps
pseudorandom (PH) code to the command link. The satellite command receiver
extracts this code. It is then retransmitted as part of the telemetry downlink signal. The
ground station measures the arrival time of the code relative to its uplink transmission
time to determine the round-trip delay, from which the range is computed. NASA's.
Goddard Range and Range Rate system operates the same way except it uses several
harmonically related sinusoidal tones plus a pseudorandom code. InteIsat uses only
four ranging tones.
In most cases we would want to use an existing IT&C ground station network.
Table 13-6 summarizes the key parameters offour networks (see Chaps. 11 and 15 for
additional details). The ratio of downlink-ta-uplink frequencies listed in the table
applies when the satellite transmitter is phased-locked to the received uplink carrier.
This mode allows the Doppler frequency shift of the RF carrier to be accurately
measured at the ground station to determine the range rate. The United States has
NASA's Deep Space Network and the Air Force's Satellite Control Network. Intelsat

548

Communications Architecture

13,2

Data Rates

13.2

549

~d ?ther communications satellite operators use their own IT&C system, which
ehmmates ~e need to I?ay for the services of a larger network:. The IT&C requireme~ts for FIreSat are qwte modest and can easily be handled by its own system, except
dunng the launch phase.

pixel, 8 bits per sample and q = 0.95). This rate is far more attractive for practical
designs. We could also use some form of data processing on board the satellite, as
discussed below.

TABLE 13-6. Parameters of ExIsting Satellite TT&C Systems.

TABLE 13-7. Data RequIrement for rwo Example Sensor-Satellite Systems. For RreSat the
satellite ground track velocity provides scanning of the ground.

Command (Uplink)

Network

~~

Air Force SCN 1.76-1.84
(SGLS)
NASADSN

Inte/sat!
COMSAT

Data Rate

Freq.

(bps)

(GHz)

1.000
2.000

22-2.3

2.026-2.120 1.0-2.000
7.146-7.190
5.92-6.42
14.0-14.5

Telemetry (Downlink)

2.2 2.3
8.4-8.5

Data Rate
(bps)

DUUL

CarrIer Freq.

Range
Measurement

Ratk)

1261.024M

2561205

8-6.6M

2401221
7491880

100-250
3.9-42 1.000-4.800
100-250 122or17.7 1.000-4.800

Not
appUcable

1 Mbps PN Code

PN Code at 1 Mbps + 8

Ranging Tones.
8 Hz 10 500 kHz
4 Ranging Tones:
27.777 kHz, 3.96825
Hz. 283.477 Hz. 35.431

Hz

TDRS-'
'MAS-Band 10kbps MAS-Band lklo1.5M
(user satel/ite
2.1064
max
22875
altitude below "SAS-Band 300kmax SAS-Band 1klo 12M
12,OOOkm)
2.026-2.120
2.2-2.3
"SAK-Band 25M max SAK-Band lklo300M
13.775
15.0034

(S)240/221

3Mbps
PNCode

(S)2401221
(K) 1.600/1.469

.:MA-I'.o!ulliple Access. up to 20 users simultaneously
SA-Slngle Access
"'Frequencies 10 and from user sateillte

~ sh~wn in Table 13-6 is NASA's Tracking & Data Relay Satellite (TDR~,
which provides an alternative to ground stations for supporting the IT&C link [yuen
1983]. The orbit of the user satellite must be below synchronous altitude to be in vie~
of the TDRS antennas.
13.2.2 Data Collection

In the second .type o~ network! a satellite sensor, such as an optical or radar scanner,
collects data. This ~ta IS tranSDlltted to the ground station for processing and viewing
by the user. !he pictures of global cloud cover on the evening television news come
from a sate!llte sensor. Although we could include the sensor data as part of the telemetry data discuss~ above, we usually consider the sensor data separately when the
sensor data rate IS greater than 100 kbps or so. Data rate requirements for payload
sensors are discussed in Sec. 9.5.5.
. Table 13:7 lists the data rates for two satellite-sensor configurations. One example
IS. a geostation~ satellite with a radiometer which scans the entire Earth in 20 min
W1~ 1 km resolution. Here the data rate is 1.42 Mbps, similar to a meteorological satelhte such as GOES.
On the other hand, using Eq. (9-23), we Calculate the FIreSatdata rate to be
85 Mbps-too high for any practical, cost-effective system. Let us review the FireSat ~ssio? requirements. FIrst, we need to scan 150,000 acres (about 25 km by 25
km) In 4 mm wi~ 30 m resolution. B! limiting the sensor coverage to the 150,OOO-acre
area under surveillance as the satellite passes overhead, the sensor output rate would
be only 2,900 pixels per second, * for a data rate of 39 kbps (for 1.6 samples per

Parameter

RreSat

GeostatIonary

h =Orbit altitude (km)
v =Ground track velocity (mls)
d =Ground resolution (m)
Sw =Scan width (krn)
w =Scan width (deg)
z =In-track scan (deg)
T =Scan time
s =Number samples/pixel
n =Number bits/sample
q =Frame efficiency
R =Date rate - bps

700

35,786

6,800
30

1.000

2,700
57.9
Continuous

Earth coverage
18
18

145 jLS/scan width
1.6
8
0.95
85 x1()6

20 minlEarth image
1.6

0

8
0.95
1.42 x1()6

In many cases we do not need all data collected by the satellite's sensor. For
example, our FireSat data is of no interest unless the sensor observes heat from a forest
fire. Onboard data processing can be used to dramatically reduce the required data
rates. For FireSat, onboard processing would consist of selecting and transmitting only
those pixels receiving thermal energy above a specified temperature. The amount of
data-rate reduction depends on the portion of the observed area that is burning. We
must also insert extra bits to identify the position of the pixels or groups of pixels in
the scan. Such data processing can reduce the data rate by a factor of 3 to 10 or more,
depending on the nature of the data.
Another technique for reducing the data rate is to transmit only the changes in the
amplitude of the data samples. For example, the amplitude of the first pixel in a frame
of data could be transmitted by an 8-bit word. Changes in amplitude of subsequent
pixels, relative to the previous pixel amplitude, are then transmitted as 3-bit words,
thus reducing the data rate by 3/8.
Considerable effort has gone into reducing, or compressing, the data rate of a digitized voice channel [O'Shaughnessy, 1987]. One technique is Adaptive Differential
Pulse Code Modulation, which transmits the difference between the actual voice
sample and a predicted value based on several previous samples. Data rates have been
reduced from 64 to 32 or 16 kbps using these techniques while maintaining commercial toll-quality voice. Even greater reduction in data rates have been achieved with
Vocoders and Linear Predictive Coders. With this method, receivers use transmitted
spectraI or excitation parameters to control a voice synthesizer. It requires a data rate
of only 600 bps to 2,400 bps, but the voice often sounds unnatural. Voice-excited
vocoders combine the best features of the approaches described above, producing a
reasonably natural-sounding voice channel with a data rate of 4,800 or 9,600 bps
[Gerson, 1990].

• Th

al uI'

. (25 X 25)lan

e C c abon IS

2)(.10 m)2(130 m )2(_I_Y
lmin)
4 minJl60sec •
3

Ian

pixel

'1

550

I,
i

I'

Communications Arcbitecture

13.3

Reducing the data rate by processing or compression on board the satellite
decreases the required transmitter power, significantly reducing satellite mass. (Data
processing or compression uses VLSI circuits, which add little to satellite mass.)
Instead of reducing the satellite mass, the ground stations cali be made smaller with
increased mobility and lower cost. A lower rate link can also better survive jamming.
However, a compressed signal is less tolerant to bit errors, thus negating some of the
advantages listed above. We expect increased use of data compression in the future as
performance improves and cost decreases.

UnkDesign

13.3

TABLE 13-9. Unk Design and Payload Sizing Process.
.--

Satellite
Intelsat-V

Band
C
Ku

DSCS-111

Globalstar
Generic Intemet

Transponder
Bandwidth
(MHz)
36/41
72177
72177
241

X

50

L,S,C

60
85
16.5
100-1,000

Ka

Number
Transponders

411
1214
212
2
1
4
1
16
20

Total Relay
Bandwidth
(MHz)
2,137

Process (= DetaIled Step)

Step

'1. for
Define Requirements
Each Unk
2. Design Each Unk

13.2.3 Data Relay
Most communications satellites and data-relay satellites simply retransmit the data
received through a receiver-transmitter combination called a transponder. The total
bandwidth capacities of three communication satellites are in Table 13-8. (See
Table 13-6 for the TDRS capacities.) Transponder bandwidths of commercial geostationary communication satellites are usually 36 MHz or 72 MHz. (These transponders
are repeaters. See Sec. 13.5 for a description of the processing transponder.
TABLE 13-8. Relay Bandwidth Capabilities of Representative CommunIcation Satell"es.
The maximum data rate can be several times the bandwidth, depending on the
modulation and ground station size. The first entry for Intelsat-V.is read as 4
transponders at 36 MHz and 1 transponder at 41 MHz. The total relay bandwidth
Is calculated by multiplying the number of transponders by their bandwidth and
adding them together.
.

551

3. Size the Communication
Payload Subsystem

Reference
Table 13-1

(Input link geometry, data rate from
Table 13-1.)
A. Select frequency band
B. Select modulation. coding
C.Apply anteMa size. beamwidth
constraints (H any)
D. Estimate atmospheric. rain absorption
E. Estimate recaived noise, interference
powers
F. Calculate required antenna gains and
transmitter power
A. Select payload antenna configuration
B. Calculate antenna size
C. Estimate antenna mass
D. Estimate transmitter mass and power
E. Estimate payload mass and power

Sec. 13.3.5
Sec. 13.3.3
Eq.13-19

Sec. 13.3.4
Table 13-10
Sees. 13.3.2. 13.3_6
Tables 13-14. 13-15
Table 13-14
Table 13-16
FIg. 13-15
Sees. 11.2. 11.3,
+ 3C and 3D above
Table 13-1

4. Iterate Back to Table 13-1

defined by a link equation or link budget which re~te~ all of the parame~ need~ to
compute the signal-to-noise ratio of the commumcations system. The bastc equation
used in sizing a digital data link is

375

Eb

264
4,000

The cellular satellites have much different bandwidths. For example, Globalstar has
16.5 MHz transponder channels to accommodate 13 of the CDMA 1.23 MHz channels. The wideband Internet relay satellites proposed at Ka-band may have
transponders with 1 GHz bandwidths, to accommodate multiple 155 Mbps channels
for trunking Internet data between computers. The satellite communication world is
becoming much more complex.

13.3 Link Design
The overall process of link design and, subsequently, payload sizing, is summarized in Table 13-9 and described in detail in this and the next section. The process for
developing the communications architecture and determining the link requirements
was detailed in Table 13-1.
To understand link design, we need to derme the relationship between data rate.
antenna size. propagation path length. and transmitter power. This relationship is

-=
No

PLp,LsLaGr
kT;R

(13-4)

where EJ/No is the ratio of received ener~-per-bitto.noise-densi~. P is the ~smi tt~
power. Ll is the transmitter-to-antenna line I~, Gt IS the.tranSlDlt ante~a g~ Ls IS
the space loss L is transmission path loss. Gr 18 the receIve antenna gam, k IS Boltzmann' s cons~C To is the system noise temperature. and R is the data rate. The
propagation path le~gth between transmitter and receiver determines LII' ~hereas La is
a function offactors such as rainfall density. In most cases, an EblNoratio between 5
and 10 is adequate for !'eCeiving binary data with low probability of error with some
forward error correction. Once we select the orbit and determine the transmitter-to-receiver distance. the major link variables which affect sy~m cost m:e P, Gr. Gr , and R.
Rain absorption also becomes a significant factor at radio frequenCIes above 10 GHz.
Figure 13-5 illustrates the key relationships between power of the satelli~'s
transmitter diameter of the ground-station antenna. and data rate for the downlink.
These ~eters are nearly independent of ~uencies ~tween ~ MHz. and
20 GHz under clear weather conditions. The required transmitter power 18 relatively
independent of satellite altitude when the antenna be.amwidth is. set to just ~uminate
the coverage area indicated. At low altitudes.the .required trans~~ power 18 reduced
in the Earth coverage case because the area m VIew of the satellite IS smaller.

552

Communications Architecture

13.3

LiDkDesign

13.3

553

10,000 .-----,--..,..---,---.----,r---,---r--,-,~-.,........____,;r_,

1,000

~loo

Noise Rgure = 3 dB
Ebl No = 12.6 dB
No Atmospheric Loss

Transmitter

odB SaIeIIlIaAnlenna - - - - - - 7 " - . - /
GaIn Synchronous Altitude

ElRP= 25 x 0.8 x 5 = 100

I

I,.
CI.

I

I
Receive
Antenna

0.1

Area, A

Data Rate (bps)

Rg.13-S. Satellite Downlink Characteristics. The required transmitter power Is relatively
independent of satellite altitude for constant coverage. At low altitude the required
transmitter power Is reduced In the Earth coverage case because the area in view of
the satellite is smaller. The power is relatively independent of carrier frequency
between 200 MHz and 20 GHz In the absence of rain and antenna-pointing error at
the ground station.

13.3.1 Derivation of Link Equation

Consider a transmitter located at the center of a sphere of radius S, radiating power
PL1isotropically, and thus unifonnIy illuminating the surface of the sphere. The power
flux density, Wf, received on the sphere's surface is the radiated power divided by the
area of the sphere, that is, PL[141tS2. The radiated power is the transmitter power,
P, reduced by the line loss, L[, between the transmitter and the antenna.
If the transmitting antenna has a narrow beamwidth, the power flux density is
increased by the transmitting antenna gain, G" defined as the ratio of power radiated
to the center of the coverage area to the power radiated by an isotropic (omnidirectional) antenna. The received flux density is reduced by the transmission path
loss, La, which includes atmospheric and rain absorption. The power flux density then
becomes:

Rg.13-6. Trade-off between Antenna Gain and Transmmer Power. These two communication links have the same EIRP, received power density, and received signal power.
However the 1-W transmitter with the hlgh-gain antenna has only 1125 the coverage
area pro~ded by the 25-W transmitter with low-galn antenna.

The received power, C, is Wf times the effective rec~ive antenna aperture ~rea, A r •
Here Aris equal to the physical aperture area.,nIJ2/4, times ~ ante~ ejJiC1encJ.' TJ.
The efficiency, 1'/, is a Figure of Merit bet,,:ee.n 0 and 1, and IS a function of vanous
imperfections in the antenna. including deViations of the reflector surfa~ from th~
reticaI, feed losses, and aperture blockage. A typical value for parabolic ~te~as 18
0.55, though 0.6 to 0.7 often occur in high quality, ground antennas. Substituting for
WI' from Eq. (13-5), andAr , we obtain
C=

(13-5)
W/m2•

where Wf is typicaIIy expressed in
PLP, is called the effective isotropic
radiated power, or EIRP, in watts. In Fig. 13-6, the same EIRP and received power
flux density is produced two ways, one using a high-power transmitter, the other a
low-power transmitter. The difference between them is that the approach using a
low-power. high-gain antenna illuminates only a limited coverage area. which mayor
may not meet the mission requirements.

PLPtLaD;TJ
16S2

(13-6)

where Dr is the diameter of the receive antenna...
.
The antenna gain may also be defined as the ratio of Its effecbve a~ area. Ar ,
to the effective area of a hypothetical isotropic antenna. A,2/47t, where A,IS the wavelength of the transmitted signal. For the receive antenna
(13-7)

554

CommunicatioDS Arcbitedure

13.3

Substituting Eq. (13-5) into Eq. (13-4) we obtain

(13-8)
where C is the received power and (A./41tS)2 is defined as the space loss, Ls.
In digital communications, the received energy per bit, Eb , is equal to the received
pOwer times the bit duration, or

(13-10)
and

(13-11)

(13-12)
where No is in WIHz, N is in W, k is Boltzmann's constant =
Ta is
in K. and B is in Hz. By combining Eqs. (13-9) and (13-10) with Eq. (13-8), we obtain
our original link equation, Eq. (13-4).
1.380 x 10-23 JrK,

13.3.2 Link Design Equations

The link equation is a product of successive terms and, therefore, can be conveniently expressed in terms of decibels dB. A number expressed in dB is just 10 loglo
of the number. Thus, a factor of 1,000 is 30 dB and a factor of 05 is -3 db. If the
number has units, they are attached to the dB notation. For example, 100 W is 20 dBW.
Antenna gain is the ratio of radiated intensity in a specific direction to that of an
isotropic antenna radiating uniformly in all directions and, therefore~ is a pure number
which should, in principle, be expressed in dB. However, we use dBi (dB relative to
isotropic) as the units for antenna gain to be consistent with standard practice in the
industry.·
Eq. (13-4) can be rewritten in decibels as

or

Ei/No= P + L[ + Gt + Lpr + Ls + La + Gr + 228.6 -10 10g7; -10 logR

(13-13)

where EblNo. L[, Gt , LS' La~!-'p'''' and Grare in dB, P is in dBW, Tsis in K, R is in bps,
and 10 log k =-228.6OdBW/(Hz·K). This can also be written as
Ei/No =EIRP + Lpr + Ls + La + Gr + 228.6 - 10 10gTs - 10 10gR

(13-14)

• Editor's Note: Of course, modem computers are fu)]y capable of mUltiplying real numbers
instead of adding logarithms. Uke much of astronautics, this peculiar nomenclature remains
intact primarily to ensure the full employment of communications systems engineers.

555

where the EIRP is in dBW and sensitivity ?f the receiving stati~, ~rlTs = Gr 10 log Ts> is expressed in dBlK. Eq. (13-14) IS pre~erred when specifYing the transmitter EIRP and receiver Grll's separately..Note. that m these equatlO~s, Gr and Ts m~t
be specified at the same point, usually the Junction between the receive antenna tenmnal and the Low Noise Amplifier.
. .
.
We can [md the carrier-to-noise-density-ratio, CI No by multiplymg Ei/ No by
the data rate, R [see Eq. (13-9)]. Carrier power in W is the energy per bit in J times the
number of bits per second.
GINo == Ei/No + 10 log R

(13-9)
where C is in W, R is the data rate in bps, and Eb is in W·s or J.
The noise power at the receiver input usually has a uniform noise spectral density,
No, in the frequency band containing the signal. The total received noise power, N, is
then N,JJ, where B is the receiver noise bandwidth. (B is determined by the data rate
and the choice of modulation and coding, as discussed later in this chapter.) No and N
are related to the system noise temperature, Ta, by:

Link Design

13.3

=(EIRP) + Ls + La + G,.I1; + 228.6

(13-15a)
(l3-ISh)

From Eq. (13-12), the carrier-to-noise-ratio, GIN is GlNoB or, in dB, is c/No 10 log B. Combining this with Eq. (I3-15b):
GIN =EIRP + Ls+ La + Gr + 228.6 - 10 10gTs -10 log B

(13-16)

where B is the noise bandwidth of the receiver in Hz. GIN also equals EblNo+ 10
10g(R/B).
. ed 'fth
.
The Received Isotropic Power, or RIP, is the power recelV 1 e receIve an~~a
gain is 0 dB. If we substitute Gr = 1 (0 dB) i.Dto Eq. (13.-8), then C = RIP. Combmmg
this expression with Eq. (13-4), and converting to dB Yields:
RIP = EblNo - Grl1's- 228.60 + 10 log R
(13-17)
where RIP is in dBW; A good way to specify the receiving system performance is to
specify the bit error rate (the probability a data bit is incorrectly. received) required
a given RIP. The designer then has the freedom to ~e off ?is demodulator. desIgn
(which determines the Ebl No required to meet the specified bit ,:rror ~te) ag~st the
antenna gain and noise temperature (GITs) to meet the RIP SpecIfication at IDlmmurn
cost.
We can similarly convert Eq. (13-7) to dB. Using the relationship! = ciA., where c
is the velocity of light in free space <= 3 X 108 mis, we obtain the following equation
for the antenna gain, G, in dB:
.

!or

G =20 log 1t + 20 log D + 20 log! + 10 log 17 - 20 log c

(13-18a)

G=-15959+2010gD+2010g!+ 10 log 17

(13-18b)

or
where G is in dB,fis in Hz, and D is in m.
•.
•
For a circular antenna beam the half-power beamWldth, 8, IS the angle across which
the gain is within 3 dB (50%) of the peak gain. We may estimate 8 from the following
empirical relationship:

8=~
(1 in degrees
(13-19)
!GHrP
where !GHz is the carrier frequency in GHz, and D is the antenna diameter in m.·
• Equation (13-19) Yields a beamwidth about 20% greater than AID (Chap. 9). This accounts for
the nonuniform illumination of the parabola by the feed.
.

r

Communications Architecture

556

13.3

Link Design

13.3

The antenna gain is approximately 27,00010 2, obtained by combining Eqs. (13-7)
and (13-19), and assuming 1/ =0.55. A noncircular antenna has an elliptical beam with
the half-power beamwidth along the major axis equal to Ox and the half-power beamwidth along the minor axis equal to By. The gain of the noncircular beam antenna can
be estimated:
(13-20)
where Ox and Oy are in deg, and G is in dBi. For example, an antenna with a 1 deg by
2 deg elliptical beam has the same gain as a circular antenna with a beamwidth of
1.4 deg. Gain calculated in this manner is generally accurate to within 25% (1.2 dB)
for beamwidths less than 150 deg. The beamwidths Ox or Oy can be estimated from
Eq. (13-19) with D equal to the major axis or minor axis diameters.
The above gain equations are for peak gain. However, a receive antenna might not
be located at the center of the transmitter antenna beam, or vice versa. With narrow
beamwidths, small errors in pointing the antenna (introduced by wind gusts on the
ground or satellite stabilization errors, for example) can lead to significantly reduced
gain. The following equation estimates the reduction from peak gain, L e,in dB caused
by a pointing offset from beam center:

L e=-12 (e/0)2

Ls= ()"14nS)2

=(c 141CSf)2

(13-22)

Converting into dB, this gives:

Ls = 20 log (3 x lOS) - 20 log (4n) - 20 log S - 20 logf

(13-23a)

= 147.55 - 20 log S - 20 logf
(13-23b)
where S is the path length in m, andfis the frequency in Hz.
The system noise temperature, TS' is the sum of a number of individual contributions from various sources. We have divided the noise sources into two groups. Those
originating ahead of the antenna aperture (e.g., in the atmosphere) we call the antenna
noise temperature, Tant • These noise sources are external to the ground station, except
for the antenna itself, and include:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Fa(dB)
60
50

40

...

, ...,

·C

taK(K)
100,000·
10,000·

...,

...,

, ...

...

0

...... .......

-20

1·

Galactic noise
Noise radiated by clouds and rain in the propagation path
Solar noise (either in the antenna main beam or sidelobe)
Presence of the Earth (typically 290 K) in a sidelobe
Man-made noise (either in the antenna main beam or sidelobe)
Contribution of nearby objects, buildings, radomes, etc.

• Temperature of blockage items in antenna subsystem such as booms or feeds
Figure 13-7 shows the estimated noise temperature from various external sources
as a function of frequency. Note the necessity of keeping the receive antenna from
pointing toward the Sun when the beamwidth is narrow « 5 deg). Otherwise the Sun
will significantly increase the antenna noise temperature.

..... ..............

-------

B "" ...
E(o")
".--..... ' - - '7--......... -~..:------, E (90")

......'

-10

10·

-----..... p.....

...,

10
1,000·
100·

.

' ..., ...,A

"

G,,' F

-30

0.1·

-wL----------L----------L---------~1~0--------~1=OO

0.01

0.1

1.0
Frequency (GHz)

(13-21)

where Ois the antenna half-power beamwidth, and e is the pointing error. For example,
for e equal to 012, the pointing loss is 3 dB. In calculating a link budget, we would
subtract this pointing loss from the antenna gain.
From Eq. (13-6) the space loss, Ls' is

557

A: EstImated median business area man-made noise

B: Galactic noise
Atmospheric noise, value exceeded 0.5% of time
0: Quiet Sun (112 deg beamwldth directed at Sun)
E: Sky noise due to oxygen and water vapor (very narrow beam antenna);
upper curve, O-deg elevation angle; lower curve, 9O-de.g elevation angle
F: Black body (cosmic background), 2.7 K
G: Heavy rain (SO mmlhr over 5 km)

c:

Fig. 13-7_ Minimum Expected External' Noise From Natural and Man-made Sources,

10 MHz to 100 GHz [Ippolito, 1986].

All noise sources between the antenna terminal and the receiver output are lumped
together and called receiver noise temperature, Tr. Receiver noise originates from
• Transmission Lines and Filters-equal to (1- L)T, where L;: Pol Piis the ratio
of output power (Po) to input power (Pi) and T is the component temperature
inK.
• Low Noise AmplijieF-equal to (F - 1) 290 K, where F is the noise figure from
Eq. (13-24).
An additional contribution from subsequent amplifier stage noise exists, but is a
small contributor because it is divided by the low noise amplifier gain.
The noise figure, F, of the receiver is defined as:
T.

F=I+...L
To

(13-24)

where T, is the noise temperature of the receiver itself, and To is a reference temperature, us~ally 290 K. The noise figure is often expressed in dB (that is, 10 log F). For
example, a cryogenically cooled receiver for reception of telemetry signals from a
space probe may have a noise figure of 1.1 (0.4 dB) for a noise temperature of 29 K.

Communications Architecture .

558

Adding the antenna noise and receiver noise gives us the system noise temperature,

Ts. To find Ts we add the noise contribution of the transmission line and bandpass filter
which connect the antenna to the receiver's low-noise amplifier. Thus:

Ts =Tant

+( To(~L,.»)+( To(~-l»)

55!J

symbols. Each symbol corresponds to one of four carrier phases: 0 deg, 90 deg,
180 deg, or 270 deg. Note that the symbol rate is one half the bit rate, thus reducing
the spectrum width by one half.

(13-25)

where Lr is the line loss between the antenna and receiver, expressed as a power ratio.
The second tenn in Eq. (13-25) is the noise contribution from the transmission line,
and the third tenn is the contribution from the receiver. The receiver noise temperature
is the sum of these two tenns. These noise temperatures are referred to the antenna
terminal by dividing by Lr • Continuing with our cooled receiver example, assume the
line loss is 0.5 dB, making Lr = 0.89. Then the noise contribution from the line loss is
36 K and the receiver noise is 33 K, both referred to the antenna tenninal. Then 7; is
Tant +69K.
Table 13-10 shows typical noise temperatures for satellite systems using uncooled
receivers. When a narrow satellite-antenna beam looks at Earth, the uplink antenna
noise temperature is the temperature of the Earth, about 290 K. In the future, improvements in design of low-noise amplifiers will reduce the receiver noise figures,
especially at higher frequencies.
TABLE 13-10.

Link Design

13.3

TIme Function

Frequency Spectrum

="'~-=-=-----.

:: '1+1 ' I ' I ' I ' I ' I'

OllR
2

2R

f

R

BPSK

AA AMAAA AAAJA.

r
QPSK

t

VWI
VIVlJ.,VWI
V1VV,
0" 180"
0"
0" 180" 180"

+1w-AW-AttAtA+#A+lA+lAirt'
+'AV
'tf-A'Vrt-AI......-..... t
VVV Vv-V A'rV
90"
(01)

TypIcal System Noise Temperatures In Satellite CommunIcation Unks In
Clear Weather. The temperatures are referred to the antenna terminal. [See

•

0"
(00)

180"
(11)

1

-IRI2"

•

f

•

f

Eq. (13-25)1.
Frequency (GHz)
NoIse
Temperature

Antenna Noise (I<)
Une Loss (dB)
Una Loss Noise (I<)
Receiver Noise Figure (dB)
Receiver Noise (I<)
System Noise (I<)
System Noise (dB-I<)

Downlink

0.2
150
0.5
35
0.5
36

221
23.4

2-12
25
0.5
35
1.0
75
135
21.3

Crosslink

20
100
0.5
35
3.0
289

424
26.3

60
20
0.5
35
5.0
627
682
28.3

•

Uplink

0.2-20
290
0.5
35
3.0
.289
614
27.9

40
290
0.5
35
4.0
438
763
28.8

13.3.3 Modulation and Coding

Before we can complete our link design, we need to select a modulation and coding
technique. Modulation is the process by which an input signal varies the characJeristics
of a radio frequency carrier (usually a sine wave). These characteristics are amplitude,
phase, frequency, and polarization. Demodulation of the signal at the receiver consists
of measuring the variations in the characteristics of the received carrier and deducing
what the original signal was. Amplitude modulation, though common in terrestrial
services, seldom appears in satellite systems because it requires larger (and more
costly) transmitters. Phase or frequency modulation techniques are preferred, because
the transmitter can operate at saturation for maximum power efficiency.
Figure 13-8 shows the most common modulation techniques used in satellite
systems. Binary phase shift keying (BPSK) consists of setting the carrier phase at 0 deg
to transmit a binary 0, and setting the phase at 180 deg to transmit a binary 1. Quadriphased phase shift keying (QPSK), takes two bits at a time to define one of four

t

12345878

AAAAAAAAAAAAA
8FSK

VVVV'Tv \fvlJ VVV\

~;~) ·1- (O~;--f
Rg. 13-8. Modulation Types Commonly Used for DlgHaI SIgnal TransmIssIon In SateDJte
CommunJcatJons. R is the data rate. The shaded region is the required bandwidth.

Frequency shift keying (FSK) sets the carrier frequency at FI to transmit a binary
0, and at F2 to transmit a binary 1. The separation between F1 and F2 must be at least
equal to the data rate to avoid performance loss from mutual interference. Thus, the
transmitted spectrum width is at least twice the width of the spectrum generated by
BPSK. Multiple frequency shift keying (MFSK) sets the carrier frequency to one of M
frequencies. For example. for M =8, the first three binary bits, 010, determine that the
transmitted frequency will be F5. The next three bits, 011. set the frequency at F6. The
symbol rate is one-third the bit rate, and the transmitted spectrum width is about 8/3
the bit rate, where the separation between frequencies is the symbol rate. Less common
spaceflight modulation schemes include minimum-shift-keying (MSK), offset-QPSK
(OQPSK), 8PSK [Sklar, 1988), and BPSKIPM [yuen, 1983).

560

Communications Architecture

13.3

These modulation techniques have different spectrum widths, and thus require
different RF channel bandwidths, as illustrated in Fig. 13-8. An actual system may
require wider bandwidths as a result of a tradeo!fbetween performance and fil~ complexity. For example, the FLTSATCOM Expenme~tal Package uses 8FSK ~ Its ~_
ulation technique, with the tone frequency separation and total spectrum WIdth twice
as large as that shown in the figure to make the filters less compl~x [McElroy, 1.988].
To demodulate a digital bit reliably, the amount of energy receiVed for that bl~ Eb ,
must exceed the noise spectral density, No, by a specified amount. Communication
theory derives the EblNo needed to achieve a req~ bit e"or ra:~, BER, ~ !he
receiver output (see Sklar [1988], Chap. 3). The BER gives the probability of recelVln?
an erroneous bit. For example, a BER of 10-5 means that, on the average, only one bIt
will be in error for every lOS bits received.
.
.
FSK- and MFSK-modulated signals are usually demodulated by measunng the
received power at each of the possible frequencies, and selec!ing the .freq~ency with
the largest power as the one transmitted. An adv~ta~e of this technique IS th~t any
variations in carrier phase introduced by the tranSffil~Slon channel (such as ~ultipath)
will not greatly degrade the link performance. For ~s reason, these modulation ~
are often used in military communications satellites (MFSK) and command links
(FSK modulation of a subcarrier).
On the other hand, demodulation of either BPSK and QPSK requires us to measure
the phase of the received carrier. Thus phase distortion caused ~y ~e ~smission
channel will significantly degrade perform~ce. ~e effect ?f this dlstortio.n can ~
reduced using Differential PSK (DPSK). This techmque reqUIres no change 10 .c~er
phase when transmitting a binary 0, and a 180-~eg phas.e reve~ when ~sffil~ng.a
binilIY 1. At the receiver the phase Of the came~ receI~ed ~unng each ~It penod IS
compared with the phase received dunng ~e preVIO~ bIt period to de~[ffil~e whether
a phase change took place. This modulation technique overcomes distortion effects
provided the phase changes between successive bit periods are small « 20 deg for
< 0.5 dB degradation).
Unfortunately, both BPSK and QPSK modulation experience sudden phase tran~i­
tions at the bit boundaries. These transitions generate sidebands outside the malO
signal spectrum which may interfere with an adjacent. ~uency channel..But if th~
carrier phase is gradually moved from one phase position to the next dunng the bIt
period (from 0 deg to 180 deg, for example), then the sideband power is greatly
reduced. One version of this technique is Minimum Shift Keying (MSK) [Sklar, 1988,
Sec. 7.9.2). These bandwidth efficient modulation techniques are particularly useful in
communications satellite systems with multiple channels closely spaced to fit the
available frequency spectrum.
A modulation method that combines binary phase shift keying of a subcarrier with
phase modulation of the carrier is BPSKlPM· m~ulation. Many &C links use this
modulation because the carrier and data are tranSffiltted at frequencIes separated by the
subcarrier frequency, which is made much larger than the data rate. This separation
allows easy acquisition and tracking of the carrier, thus providing an accurate rangerate measurement The disadvantages of this technique are additional power required
for the carrier and increased bandwidth (to approximately twice the subcarrier frequency). For example, the SGLS TT&C downlink uses a 1.024 MHz subcarrier BPSK
modulated by data rates up to 128 kbps. The subcarrier then phase modulates the

'I!

• FrreSat will use this technique for the uplink.

UnkDesign

13.3

561

carrier. For a phase modulation of ±1.0 radian, the transmitter power is divided
betWeen the carrier (60%) and subcarrier (40%). Figure 13-9 shows how the BER
varies with EblNo' Table 13-11 lists the types of digital modulation commonly used in
space communication systems.

10-3

Shannon
Umlt

10-6

10-7 -2
• Noncoherent cIetecIIon

14

Fig. 13-9. Bit Error Probability as a Function of EblN".The theoretical performance limit
can be approached by use of error correction coding.

For the digital systems discussed in this chapter, the BER is used to evaIuate the
performance of the link. On the other hand, analog communication links are generally
evaluated in tenns of the output signal-to-noise ratio, SIN. The SIN is a function of the
CIN, the modulation type, and how the SIN is expressed. For example, the SIN of a
frequency modulated (FM) television signal depends on the modulation index and the
pre-emphasis plus weighting factors in addition to the C/N (see Morgan and Gordon
[1989), Sec. 3.4.5).
Forward error correction coding significantly reduces the EblNo requirement,
which in tum reduces the required transmitter power and antenna size, or increases
link margin. Extra bits, called parity bits, are inserted into the data stream at the
transmitter. These bits enable the receiver to detect and correct for a limited number
of bit errors which might occur in transmission because of noise or interference. While
complex, these techniques can be implemented at relatively low cost, using large scale
integrated circuits with small size and low power consumption. This type of coding
does have some disadvantages. The extra error correction bits increase the bit rate, and .
hence the transmission bandwidth, often a scarce resource. Also, a low EblNo makes
initial signal acquisition more difficult
A common type of error correction technique is convolutional coding with Viterbi
decoding [Viterbi, 1967; Sklar, 1988]. A rate-ll2 convolutional code is implemented
by generating and transmitting two bits for each data bit The data rate is therefore onehalf the transmitted bit rate (hence ''rate-II2''). The receiver demodulates and stores in

Communications Architecture

562

13.3

TABLE 13-11. A Comparison of Several Modulation and Coding Schemes Used In Sat.
elllte Communication Systems. The theoretical values of EblNo shown must
be Increased by 1-3 dB to account for filtering. timing. and frequency errors. See
text for definition of modulation schemes. In the bottom row R = data rate and fsc

= subcarrler frequency.
fi,lNofor

BER=1~5

(dB)

Spectrum
UtIlization

BPSK

9.6

1.0

Good BEA performance.
Good use of spectrum.

SUsceptible to phase
disturbances.

DPSK

10.3

1.0

Not susceptible to phase
disturbances.

HIgher EblNo required.

QPSK

9.6

2.0

ExceOent use of spectrum. More susceptible to phase
disturbances.

FSK

13.3

0.5

Not susceptible to phase
disturbances.

Higher Et/No required.
Poor use of spectrum.

8FSK

9.2

0.375

Good BEA performance.
Not susceptible to phase
disturbances.

Poor use of spectrum.

BPSKand
QPSKPlus
R-112 VlteTbi
DecodIng

4.4

BPSK and Plus
RS Vlteml
DecodIng

2.7

0.44

Best BEA perfonnance.

Most complex.
Reduced use of spectrum.

8FSKPlus
R-112 VlteTbi
DecodIng

4.0

0.188

Excenent BER
perfonnance.
Not susceptible to phase
disturbances.

Poor use of spectrum.
HIgh complexity.

MSK

9.6

1.5

Low adjacent channel
Interference.

Higher complexity.

BPSK/PM
(MlJ = 1.0 rad

13.6

R
-2fsc
-

CarrIer transmftled for
Doppler measurement

Requires extra power
and bandwidth.

Modulation

sinewave)

Advantages

0.5 and 1.0 Excenent BER
perfonnance.

Disadvantages

HIgher complexity.
Reduced use of spectrum.

memory a sequence (typically 62 bits long). As time goeS on, additional bits are
received and stored. These sequences are compared with coded sequences which could
have been transmitted. The possible sequence which most closely resembles the
received sequence is chosen as the most likely sequence transmitted. This process is
repeated a number of times to reduce the probability of error. As shown in Fig_ 13-9,
Viterbi decoding greatly reduces the EVNo required to obtain a specified BER. For
example, a BER of 10-5 is achieved with an EblNo of 4.4 dB. This represents an
improve~ent, or coding gain, of 5.2 dB below the 9.6 dB required for uncoded BPSK.
There is a value of EVNo equal to -1.6 dB, known as the Shannon limit, below
which no error-free communication at any information mte can take place. This is
derived from the Shannon-Hartley theorem, which states that the maximum theoretical data mte, RI'fUlX' which can be transmitted over a transmission channel with bandwidth, B, is

13.3

Link Design

563

(13-26)
where CIN is the avemge carrier-ta-noise power mtio in the channel (see Panter
[1965], Sec. 19.2; or Sklar [1988], Sec. 7.4).
We cannot reach the Shannon limit in pmctice because the transmission bandwidth
and coding complexity increases without bound. But we can apprc:>ach this limit by
using a double, or concatenated, coding scheme. The Pioneer deep-space communication link uses this technique to obtain the performance required to overcome the large
space loss [Yuen, 1983, Sec. 5.4.4]. The binary signal is first block encoded using a
255-bit Reed-Solomon code with 32 parity bits. The block-encoded signal is then
encoded using the mte-l12 convolutional code. The data is recovered at the receiver
with a Viterbi decoder followed by a Reed-Solomon decoder. As shown in Fig. 13-9,
the BER performance for the concatenated code is only 4.2 dB above the Shannon
limit at a BER ono-5• Longer and more complex codes can be used to push performance even closer to the Shannon limit This technique is not presently used for data
rates much above 100 bps due to the complexity and cost of the decoding process.
However, we expect this limitation to disappear in the future with the development of
high-speed, low-cost digital processing circuits.
Figure 13-9 demonstmtes that the BER is sensitive to the EblNo level. At error rates
below 10-4, a decrease of 1 dB in EblNo will increase the BER about one order of
magnitude. Thus, providing adequate link margin in our design (discussed later) is
very important. Note that the EblNo values given are theoretical, based on infinite
bandwidth transmission channels and ideal receivers. In pmctice, we must account for
band-limiting effects, deviations from ideal filter responses, phase noise and frequency drift in local oscillators, noise in carrier tmcking loops, and bit synchronizing
errors. Thus, we must add 1 or 2 dB to the theoretical EblNo to aIIow for these losses.
Choosing which modulation and coding technique to use depends on cost,
complexity, difficulty of acquiring the signal, limits on transmission bandwidth, and
susceptibility to interference or fading. In the case of power-limited systems, where
power is scarce but bandwidth is available, coding makes sense_ Most systems today
use some forward error correction coding to save transmitter power unless the data rate
is greater than several hundred Mbps, in which case limits on both bandwidth and
hardware speed become significant.
.
Table 13-11 showed that to obtain a low value of EblNo for a BER of 10-5, we must
!>e less efficient in using the spectrum, which means the transmission bandwidth must
.increase. This is the result of adding forward error correction check bits to the signal
before modulation, thus increasing the transmission mte through the channel. However, recent techniques can achieve significant coding gains without increasing the
bandwidth [Ungerboeck, 1982; Sklar, 1988, Sec. 7.10.6]. The basic idea is to combine
the coding and modulation process to genemte a set of possible coded signal patterns
at RF, each pattern corresponding to an n-bit word. The receiver knows the set of possible patterns and chooses the pattern that most closely resembles what it receives. For
example. a four-state, rate-2/3, encoder combined with 8PSK modulation achieves a
3 dB coding gain over uncoded QPSK modulation with the same bandwidth. (8PSK is
like QPSK except the carrier phase is set at one of 8 possible phases separated by
45-deg intervals.) Such schemes have been proposed for high-speed data communication on satellite channels and are likely to be used in future space systems [Deng and
Costello. 1989].

I

564

Communications Architecture

13.3

:

Link Design

13.3

565

13.3.4 Atmospheric and Rain Attenuation

The transmission path loss caused by the Earth's atmosphere, La' is a function of
frequency as shown in Fig. 13-10. This figure gives the attenuation at 9O-deg elevation, that is, zenith. To detennine the loss at elevation angles,ft, above 5 deg, divide
the zenith attenuation by sinft. At frequencies below 1,000 MHz, ionospheric scintillation can cause significant fluctuations in received amplitude and phase. These effects
are most severe at frequencies below 200 MHz during periods of high sunspot activity,
when they can disrupt communications (see Ippolito [1986], Chap. 8). Above 50 GHz,
high attenuation occurs at frequencies corresponding to the oxygen absorption band.
Virtually all Earth-space communications use frequencies between these two
extremes, though some projects have considered the 90-GHz band. Of special note is
the high absorption band of oxygen at 60 GHz. Intersatellite links often operate at
60 GHz, using the atmosphere to shield from interference or jamming originating on
the Earth's surface.

Elevation
Angle 10"

40

Availabnlly

_ _ 99.5%

----98.0%

10

i'
~

c

10 2

o

;

i'"

~
;s

101

Ag.13-11.

c

~

,..
:;

.
o
c

10-1

iii
o

!g

.c

....

10-2

Okm
4
8
12
16
2

5

10

20

50

100

200

400

Rain Attenuation Predicted by Crane Model for Rain Climate Typical of the
Northern United States. Ground station altitude 0 km, latitude 40°. For other
cases, see Ippolito [1986].

Theoretical Vertical One-way Attenuation from Speclffed Height to the Top of
the Atmosphere. Plot assumes 7.S glm3 of water vapor at the surface, and does
not include effect of rain or cloud attenuation [NASA, 19831.

Figure 13-11 shows that clouds and rain attenuation also add to losses, increasing
with frequency, in the transmission path. This figure comes from the Crane model-a
set of tables and equations based on observed climatic data used to estimate the rain
attenuation (see Crane [1980], or Ippolito [1986]). This attenuation becomes an
important consideration when designing systems employing satellite-Earth link
frequencies above 10 GHz. Figure 13-'11 also shows that the attenuation increases
rapidly as the antenna elevation angle decreases below 20 deg. When operating at
frequencies above 20 GHz, the minimum elevation angle to the satellite should be
specified at 20 deg, especially in high rainfall areas. Note, however, that increasing the
minimum elevation angle dramatically reduces the size of the satellite's coverage area
(see Sees. 5.3 and 5.4).

=

The percentage of time the link is available depends on the margin ~hich the li~k
has in clear weather. A higher link availability demands a greater margIn. The availability numbers shown in Fig. 13-11 co~nd ~o th~ cli~te of ~ortheast~m United
States. The availability for a specified link margm WIll be higher In the Midwest and
lower in the Southeast, compared to those shown in the figure. (Bear in mind that these
availability numbers come from average weather conditions over many years; they do
not account for the possibility that this year the rainfall may be higher or lower than a
normal year.)
. .
A by-product of rain attenuation is an increase in antenna temperature, Ta , gIven by

Ta = (I - La)1'o

Frequency (GHz)

Ag.13-10.

=

(13-27)

where L is the rain attenuation given as a power ratio, and 1'0 is the temperature of the .
rain, us;ally assumed to be 290 K. The significan~e of thi~ ~oise ~ depends on
the system noise in clear weather. For example, I~ a recelVl~g s~stem. WIth a normal
system temperature of727 K experienced 10 dB raID attenuation, I~ nOIse temperature
would increase to 988 K, increasing No by 1.3 dB. The decrease In C/No would then
be the sum of the rain attenuation (-10 dB) and the increased noise (-1.3 dB) totaling
11.3 dB.
13.3.5 Frequency Selection

Regulatory constraints exist on the selectio? of fre~uency band, transmission bandwidth, and power flux density. For example, mtemational agreements have allocated
frequency bands for space communications, as listed.in ~able 13.-12. These agreements originated with the International TelecommunIcations UnIOn (lTU) and the

Communications Architecture

566

13.3

World Administrative Radio Conference (WARC). They are administered in the United
States by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) for commercial users, and
by the Interdepartmental Radio Advisory Committee for military users. The system
designer must apply for and receive permission from the appropriate agency to operate
at a specified frequency with the specified orbit and ground locations. This is often a
time-consuming procedure (see Chap. 21.1). For an excellent summary of this complex subject, see Morgan and Gordon [1989].
TABLE 13-12. Umltatlons on the Frequency Bands and Rux DensHles Estabnshed by the
ITU. Power density limits are for elevation angle >25 deg. They are about 10 dB
less for loWer angles.

UnkDesign

13.3
13.3.6 Link Budgets

The link: budget provides the designer with values of transmitter power and antenna
ains for the various links in the system. It i~ therefore one of the key items in a space
~ystem design, revealing many chara~teristics of the overall system ~ormance.
Table 13-13 presents link budgets for FrreSat command and telemetry usmg the equations and figures given in this chapter.
TABLE 13-13.

Unk Budgets for RreSal

;-

Frequency
Band
UHF
L

S
C

X

Ku
Ka
SHFIEHF
SHFIEHF
V

Uplink

Downlink

Service

02-0.45
1.635- 1".66

0.2-0.45
1.535-1.56

Military
Marltlme/Nav
Telephone
Broadcast, Telephone
Domestic, Comsat
Military, Comsat
Domestic, Comsat
Domestic, Comsat
Military, Comsat
Intemet Data,
Telephone, Trunking
Satellite Crosslinks

2.65-2.69
5.9-6.4
7.9-8.4
14.0-14.5
27.5-31.0
43.5-45.5
49

2.5-2.54
3.7-42
7.25-7.75
12.5-12.75
17.7-19.7
19.7-20.7
38

-60

Downlink Power
RuxDenslty
Umlt
(dBW/m2)

-1.4414 kHz
-137/4 kHz
-14214 kHz
-14214 kHz'
-138/4 kHz
-105/1 MHz

-13511 MHz

-

'No Omit In exclusively mHltary band 017.70-7.75 GHz.

A criterion for frequency band allocation is the potential for one link to interfere
with another. Extensive analysis i~ required when applying for a frequency band and
orbit to avoid interference with, or by, existing services such as terrestrial microwave
links and ground-based radar operations. Especially significant are the antenna sidelobe levels and the dynamic range of powers over which the system must operate. For
ground-station antennas operating in the 4-6 GHz and 12-14 GHz bands, the FCC
specifies the maximum sidelobe gain as (32 - 25 log tP) dBi for 1 deg ~ tP ~ 48 deg;
otherwise -10 dBi for 48 deg ~ tP~ 180 deg, where dBi is dB relative to an isotropic
radiator (0 dB gain) and tP is the angle in deg off the axis of the main antenna beam.
Also shown in Table 13-12 are the maximum allowed power flux densities radiated by
the satellite onto the Earth. These limitations, set by the ITU, are necessary to avoid
interference to existing terrestrial services, such as microwave relay links.
Two geostationary satellites in approximately the same orbit location servicing the
same ground area may share the same frequency band by: (1) separating adjacent
satellites by an angle (typically 2 deg), which is larger than the ground station's beamwidth, and (2) polarizing transmitting and receiving carriers orthogonally, which
allows two carriers to be received at the same frequency without significant mutual
interference. Right-hand and left-hand circular polarization are orthogonal, as are
horizontal and vertical linear polarization. Commercial systems use these frequencysharing techniques extensively [Morgan and Gordon, 1989].

2.2

Symbol

Units

Source

f

GHz

Input parameter

2

P

Watts Input parameter

1

20

Transmitter Power

P

10Iog(.c,

0.0

13.0

Transmitter Une Loss

L,

dB

Input parameter

-1

-1

Transmit Antenna Beamwidth

Bt

deg

Input parameter

2.0

32.0

Peak Transmit Antenna Gain

Gpt

dBI

Eq. (13-20)

38.3

14.2

Transmit Antenna Diameter

Dt

m

Eq. (13-19)

5.3

0.3

Transmit Antenna Pointing Offset

e,

deg

Input parameter

0.2

27

Transmit Antenna POinting Loss

Lpt

dB

Eq. (13-21)

-0.1

-8.5

Gpt+ Lpt

38.2

+5.7

P+L/+G,

37.2

17.7

Item
Frequency Range
(GHz)

Telemetry
and
Da1a

Command

Frequency
t"fransmitter Power

Transmit Antenna Gain (net)
Equiv. Isotropic Radiated Power

dBW

Gt

dBI

ElRP

dBW

Propagation Path Length

S

km

Input parameter

Space Loss

Ls

dB

Eq. (13-23a)

Propagation & Polarization Loss

La

dB

Fig. 13-10

Receive Antenna Diameter

D,

m

Input parameter

0.07

5.3

Eq. (13-18a)

0.74

39.1

150.0

1.8

70

0.2

Peak Receive Antenna Gain (net)

2,831

2,831

-167.5

-168.3

-0.3

-0.3

Grp

dBI

Receive Antenna Beamwidth

B,

deg

Eq. (13-19)

Receive Antenna POinting Error

e,

deg

Input parameter

Receive Antenna Pointing Loss

Lpr

dB

Eq. (13-21)

-2.6

-0.1

Receive Antenna Gain

Gr

dBI

Grp+Lpr

-1.9

39.0

Systam Noise Temperature

Ts

K

Table 13-10

614

135

Data Rate

R

bps

Input parameter

100

85x 10&

E,/No (1)

E,/No

dB

Eq. (13-13)

45.5

15.9

65.5

95.2

Carrfer-to-Noise Density Ratio
Bit Error Rate
Required EblNo (2)
Implementation Loss (3)
Margin

GINo

dB-Hz Eq. (13-15a)

BER

-

Input parameter

10-7

10-5

Req E,/No

dB

Ag.13-9

11.3

9.6

-

dB

Estimate

-2

-2

dB

(1) - (2) + (3)

322

4.3

:1
I~

:i!

568

Communications Architecture

13.3

A detailed procedure for a downlink design is as follows:
1. Select carrier frequency, based on spectrum aVailability and FCC allocations.
(Refer to Table 13-6 for TT&C, Table 13-12 for communication satellites.)
2. Select the satellite transmitter power, based on satellite size and power limits.
3. Estimate RF losses between transmitter and satellite antennas. (Usually
between -1 and -3 dB.)
4. Determine the required beamwidth for the satellite antenna, depending on the
satellite orbit, satellite stabilization, and ground covemge area (see Chap. 7).
5. Estimate th~ maxi~um. antenna pointin~ offset angle, based on coverage
angle, satellite stabll:tzation error, and stationkeeping accuracy.
6. Calculate transmit antenna gain toward the ground station, using Eqs. (13-20)
and (13-21). You might also want to' check the antenna diameter: using
Eq. (13-19), to see if it will fit on the satellite.
'
7. Calculate space loss, using Eq. (13-23a). This is determined by satellite orbit
and ground-station location.
8. ~~~ propag~tion ab~tion loss due to the atmosphere using Fig. 13-10,
dlvldmg the zeruth attenuation by. the sine of the. minimum elevation angle
(e.g. 10 deg) from the ground station to the satellite. (Consider min attenuati~n later.) I would also add a loss of 0.3 dB to account for polarization
nnsmatch for large ground antennas. Using a mdome adds another 1 dB loss.
9. Select the ground station antenna diameter and estimate pointing error. H
autotmcking is used, let the pointing error be 10% of the beamwidth. Use
Eq. (13-21) to calculate the antenna beamwidth.
10. Calculate the receive antenna gain toward the satellite. For FJreSat we used
antenna efficiency, 11, of 0.55.
11. Estimate the system noise temperature (in clear weather), using Table 13-10.
12. Calculate Ei/Nofor the required data rate, using Eq. (13-14).
13. Using Fig. 13-9, look up EVNo required to achieve desired BER for the
selected modulation and coding technique. The downlink for FrreSat is modulated with BPSK and the uplink is BPSKIPM. See Table 13-11.
14. Add 1 to 2 dB to the theoretical value given in Fig. 13-9 for implementation
losses.
15. Calculate the link margin--the difference between the expected value of
EVNocalculated and the required EVNo (including implementation loss).
16. Estimate the degradation due to min, using Fig. 13-11 and Eq. (13-27).
17. Adjust input parameters until the margin is at least 3 dB greater than the estirna.ted value for min degradation, depending on confidence in the parameter
estimates.
For communications satellites to evaluate a complete communication link (groundto-ground), you must do the downlink shown above, and also calculate the uplink and
combine their EVNos in order to evaluate the communication link.
'

UnkDesign

569

The downlink calculation described above provides the signal-to-noise at the
ground station based on the assumed pammeters for the downlink. In order to establish
the performance of a communication link Earth-to-Earth, it is necessary to do the same
calculation on the uplink from the ground station to the satellite. The overall link performance can then be predicted based on the design of the satellite communication
payload. In a bent-pipe satellite, the signal-to-noise mtio established on the uplink is
used as the "signal" input for the downlink, and a final signal-to-noise is calculated
based on the noise already on the signal plus the noise gained on the downlink. For a
signal processing payload (see Sec. 13.5.2), where signals are demodulated and remodulated on board the satellite, then the overall signal-to-noise performance is only
that of the downlink, because this is a "pure" signal genemted on the satellite. Many
of the new data satellites, and some of the cellular telephone satellites, use onboard
processing
. b'It error mte, the system foriSIgn
' al
When di:gt·ta1links are ev al"uated·m terms 0 fth err
processing satellites gets more complicated, because there will be a certain bit error
rate on the uplink which becomes the starting point for the downlink. The bit error mte
will never be better than the weakest link. For these systems, it is desirable to make the
uplink very robust so that bit error mtes of 10-9 or 10-10 are achieved on the uplink,
in order that, again, the downlink determines the overall performance. This is typical
for most satellite links, as the satellite is limited in the amount of transmit power,
whereas ground stations are relatively independent of that limitation, at least until
frequencies of 30 GHz and above are used, in which case the cost of the transmitters
becomes a limiting factor. Tmnsmit power, transmit antenna gain, receiver noise
figure, and receive antenna gain establish the maximum signal-to-noise that can be
established on any link.
Many of the data handling satellites discussed elsewhere in this chapter expect to
deliver 10-10 bit error mtes on the entire Earth-Earth link. This is being achieved by
using very powerful forward-error-correcting codes (see Sec. 13.3.3). Convolutional
coding and Viterbi decoding (rate 113, K = 7) allow 10-10 bit error mtes with E,/No
of only 5 dB for many newer, commercial data satellites.
The question often asked is, "How much margin is enough?" Clearly, too much
margin is wasteful and costly, but not enough margin could occasionally lead to
excessive bit error rates. Intelsat carries a 4 to 5 dB margin for their C-Band links. At
frequencies above 10 GHz the margin should be 6 to 20 dB to accommodate atmospheric and min losses, the exact amount depending on the required link availability
and the amount of minfall expected.
The order of the steps outlined above will depend on which pammeters are
specified. For example, one might start with link margin and solve for transmitter
power. The uplink design is performed in the same way, except the receive antenna
beamwidth rnay depend on the Earth-coverage requirement mther than size or pointing
limitations.
Figure 13-12 illustrates how the downlink design, using a geostationary satellite,
can vary with choice of carrier frequency. In this example, the satellite antenna's
beamwidth is fixed at 6 deg to illuniinate a specified Earth covemge area, and the
ground-station size is fixed at 0.5 m for ease of transport. As the frequency decreases,
the satellite antenna's diameter increases to maintain the specified beamwidth (and
gain) until it reaches a maximum size (or mass) limit, which, in this example, is 2 m
at 1.75 GHz. Reducing the frequency further requires more transmitter power to
compensate for the loss in antenna gain [see Eq. (13-18a»). On the other hand, going

I;
II

- -

570

CoDimunications Architecture

13.4

to higher frequencies requires more transmitter power to compensate for increasing
receive antenna pointing loss and to provide a margin to operate through rain. The
figure shows the preferred frequency is between 1 and 18 GHz.

I

,---

G,oConslant

SaIeIIIIe
Antenna
IIeamwId!h
LlmIIad

~

t

Parabolic
Reflector

1{'-Dr-

'8eamShape Conical
Typical Max 15-65
Gain (dBf)

I

RaIn Absorptlon
and Noise for
98% AvaJJabIIiIy

10

...

571

TABLE 13-14. Antenna Types for Satellite Systems. (Formulas from Jasik [1961D In these
equations, C, D, L, and A are in m and f is in GHz.

DiaJJam<2m

100

Sizing the Communications Payload

13.4

Antenna
Type

SaIeIIIIe Antenna
1IeamwId!h=6" _ _~

--------------

Peak Gain
(dB;)

f-- L-l1..

OB~nmmrntC=1&O

~

ho~
3A

I

(deg)

0-

"

1

0.1

10

20

30 40 50

Free Space

100

a-,

/'

f
CoaxIaJ Una

T
C=nO

.1

Conical

Toroidal

5-20

5-20

0-5

20 log (C IA)
'-2.8
(7} = 0.52)

5 log (hn) +3.5

17.8 + 20 log D 10.3 + 10 log (~LI A3)
+20Iogf'
0.8 SCI A S 1.2
(7} = 0.70)
(7} = 0.55)

52

21

Peak Gain & G= 19.1 dBI
Dimensions D=2.9m
of1S" Beam
at 400 MHz

"t=hT
RI-

Conical'

~C2LI A3

fD
Requfred
TnIJ1SIIIIlIer
/. Power In .

-I

_

7-Ialf-power

Beamwidth

BIconIcaI Hom

Hom ~.i.

HelJx

G= 19.5 dBi
D: 0.19 m 0.24 m

or
L: 9.8m 6.2 m

225

=(CIA)

R>2A.

a =P(27}A)
Typically
40° x 360°
for gain ~ -1 dBl
70° x 360°
for gain ~ -3 dB!

G= 19.1 dBI
D=3m
h=4m

-

Frequertcy, f (GIIz)

Fig. 13-12.

Example Downlink DesIgn Showing Effect of Frequency Selection on RequIred
SateDHe TransmlUer Power. A "Window" exists between 1-20 GHz. The satellite Is
in a geostationary orbit and the ground terminal diameter Is fixed at 0.5 m.

Table 13-13 shows we can satisfy the F1reSat mission with a 20-W transmitter
operating at S-Band (2.2 GHz) with a broad-beam antenna covering the entire Earth.
A higher-gain antenna requires continuous steering to point toward the ground station,
making the satellite far more complex. The diameter of the ground station antenna is .
5.3m.

z

~

13.4 Sizing the Communications Payload
We now have determined the satellite transmitter power and' antenna aperture size
required to support our links. These parameters have the greatest impact on satellite
mass, and thus on the cost of the system. In this section we will describe these

components and estimate their mass. This process is summarized in Table 13-9 in
Sec. 133.
Up to now we have considered only the parabolic reflector antenna, which is best
suited for applications where the peak gain is above 20 dB and beamwidth is less than
15 deg. For lower-gain, wider-beam applications, we may prefer other types of
antennas with lighter mass and simpler design, especially at frequencies below 1 GHz
(see Table 13-14). For example, an Earth-coverage satellite antenna has a beamwidth
just big enough to illuminate the Earth. At geosynchronous altitude, this beamwidth is

~

SpIn,or

YawAxls

/

125°

Rg.13-13.

TypIcal Satellite-Antenna RequIrements for Telemetry and Command Coverage. The sateDite Is spin-stabilized during transfer orbit, and 3-axis stabilized In
geostationary orbit [Lo and Lee, 1988].

18 deg. A simple hom antenna is often used at frequencies of 4 GHz or above (such as
the Intelsat V C-Band IT&C antenna). When the frequency is below about 2 GHz, the
helix often has lighter mass and is easier to mount on a satellite structure. Either a

572

I

Communications Architecture

13.4

single helix (FLTSATCOM UHF transmit). or quad-helix (lntelsat V L-Band) may be
used. Table 13-14 compares these choices for an Earth-coverage antenna at
400 MHz.Wider satellite antenna beamwidths are required during launch and insertion
into orbit because satellite maneuvers cause large variations in angle toward the
ground station. During transfer orbit the satellite is often spin-stabilized. thus requiring
a toroidal beam (omnidirectional in the plane perpendicular to the satellite spin axis)
to provide continuous coverage. Figure 13-13 shows a typical antenna pattern. A
biconical hom can generate this beam if it is mounted on a maSt to avoid reflections
from the satellite's body. The antenna gain is typically at least -3 dB ±35 deg from the
spin axis. Once in orbit the satellite is stabilized toward Earth. A directional antenna.
usually a simple conical hom, provides a gain of 9 dB or more over ±20 deg from the
Earth vertical. As an example. the Intelsat V satellite combines the toroidal and
directional (Eartb-coverage) beams at a single port connected to the command receiver. The telemetry transmitters switch to either beam. depending on the mission
phase.
High-gain antennas are required to support high data rates with low transmitter
power. The basic antenna types used for this application. summarized in Table 13-15,
are the reflector, lens, and phased array. The reflector is most desirable for satellites
because of its low mass, low complexity and cost, and design maturity. The weight
advantage of a reflector over a lens or phased array is especially significant for larger
antenna diameters (> 0.5 m). Offset feeds can also simplify the satellite structure. The
satellite structure contains the feed which is pointed at the reflector (lntelsat V. for
example). Furthermore, an offset feed minimizes aperture blockage and therefore
reduces the sidelobe levels.
In some missions it is necessary to change the direction the antenna beam is
pointing. Steering the beam electronically is often preferred to mechanical methods,
especially if the beam direction must be changed rapidly. The beam of a reflector
antenna can be steered by switching to an off-axis feed. However. conventional reflector antennas have high losses when scanned off axis. A shaped secondary reflector can
compensate for these losses, but scan angles greater than about 10 deg are difficult to
achieve. We can design lens antennas for good scanning performance, but their mass
is generally larger than the reflector plus feed when the diameter exceeds about 0.5 m
The lens. or reflector antenna can perform beam scanning by switching between
multiple feed elements or by using a phased array as the feed. Switching between feed
elements or varying the amplitude or phase of each element electronically controls the
feed. However, losses caused by the feed control (beam forming) network [L in
1
Eq. (13-4)] can degrade the scanning antenna's performance.
A phased-array antenna may generate one or more beams simultaneously. forming
these beams by varying the phase or amplitude of each radiating element of the array.
This technique used for microwave radiometry is described in Chap. 9. We may also
use an adaptive array to automatically point a null toward a jamming signal source to
reduce the jamming-ta-signal ratio.
To support high data rates with low satellite power, the antenna beamwidth should
be narrow. However, as illustrated in Fig. 13-14, a narrow beam may not give us
enough coverage to establish links between several widely separated ground stations.
The DSCS ill solved this problem by using waveguide lens antennas with variable
beam-forming networks to generate a single beam with multiple lobes, each directed
toward a ground station. An alternate approach is to generate multiple beams. Milstar
uses a lens with a switched-feed array. and AcrS uses a reflector with an offset

Sizing the Communications Payload

13.4

TAB

S73

LE 13-15 Six Antenna Configurations Used In Satellite Systems. These antennas are
• suitable for beamwldths less than 20 deg. producing gains above 15 dB.
ParabOlic Reflector
Center-Feed

~

Parabolic Reflector

-=€
ParabOlic Reflector
Off-set Feed

~:
~........

•
•
•
•

Aperture blockage raises sldelobe level.
Simple. Ughtwelght structure.
Feed-mounted equipment exposed to environment
Long transmission line from feed reduces efficiency.

•
•
•
•
•

Aperture blockage raises sldelobe level.
Ughtwelght structure.
Short, low-loss transmission One.
Feed-mounted equipment accessible behind reflector.
Shaped subreflector Increases efficiency
(Increases gain by -1.5 dB).

• Same as Center-fed Parabolic Reflector except low
aperture blockage reduces sldelobe level and Increases
efHclency.
• Convenient for sateliHe mounting with feed embedded
Inside satellHe.

ParabOlic Reflector
Off-set Shaped Subreflector with
Feed Arrey for Scanning

~
?

• Ught weight.
• Low aperture blockage reduces sldelobe.
• Umlted scan angle = 100.

Lens with Swllched-Feed Arrey

~~

__
-.00=

• Good aperture efficiency (no blockage).
• Mismatch at lens surface causes losses.
• Heavy. especially low-frequency applications (used at
frequencies above 15 GHz with diameters below O.5m).

•
•
•
•
•
•

High aperture efliclency.
Multiple Independently steereble beams.
High rellablDty (dlstributed active components).
High cost, weight.
Higher losses In feed distribution system.
High ElRP obtained from many smaD trensmilters
(space combining).

switched-feed array. These antennas generate either simultaneous multiple beams or a
single beam which is scanned or hopped over the Earth's surface using time multiplexing between channels (see Sec. 13.5). Thus high antenna gain and br~d area co~e~e
are achieved at the same time. Another advantage of the beamhoppmg technique 18
that the satellite coverage can be readily matched to the geographic traffic distribution
by making the beam dwell time proportional to the traffic level.
LEO satellites such as Iridium and Globalstar form multiple beams using phased
arrays covering the visible Earth. The multiple ~ provide for s~trum co~a­
tion by frequency reuse. Iridium forms 64 beams whic~ scan to continuously pomt to
a point on the Earth as the satellite passes over that pomt. Globalstar has fixed beams
which "sweep" over a point on the ground as the satellite passes over.

574

Communications Architecture

13.4

Special Topics

13.5

57S

tate tranSmitter has lower mass but requires more input power compared to the
amplifier. In general, solid-state transmitters are preferred for
power outputs up to 5 or 10 W, except at frequencies below 2 GHz, where power
outputs up to 80 W are achievable. Solid-state amplifiers are more reliable than the
traveling wave tube amplifi~, mo~y ~ause they require lower vol~ges..We expect
improved solid-state amphfiers WIth higher powers and frequenCIes will become
available during the next 10 years.

~veling wave tube

..----Ir,q...4H~--r_ Beamwldth

oILow-GaJn
Antenna

Fig. 13-14.

Mult/beam Coverage. To transmit simultaneously to A, B, and C, a multibeam
antenna or a beamhopping antenna, with time-alVision multiplexing, wiH support
higher data rates with lower transmitter power compared to a Single, lower g~n,
broad-beam antenna system.

TABLE 13-16.

Size and Mass of Typical Spacecraft Antennas. AnteMas with shaped or
multiple beams include the mass of complex feed systems. Lower gain values
are at edge of coverage.

Type

Frequency
Band
(GHz)

OuadHeJix
Conical Log Spiral
Parabola (fixed)
Hom
Parabola wi Feed An"ay
Parabola wi Feed An"ay
Parabola-Steerable
Parabola wi Feed An"ay

L(1.5)
8(2.2)
S (1.7)
C(4)
C(4)
C (6)
Ku (11)
Ka (20130)

.

Beams shaped to IIIwnfnaIe specific land masses

Gain
(dBI)
16--19
0-:'1
16--19
16--19
21-25
21-25

36
45-52

Beamwidth
(deg)
18

220
18
18

··
·

1.6

Mass
(kg)
1.8
1.2
3.9
3.1
29.4
15.2
5.8
47.1

SateUIte

Size
(m)

Intelsat-V
0.4 x 0.4 x 0.47
FLT8ATCOM
GOESI,J,K
0.7dla
Intelsat-V
0.3 dia, O.65L
Intelsat-V
2.44dia
Intelsat-V
1.56d1a
InteJsat-V
1.1 dla
SUPERBIRD
1.7 ella

The mass of a satellite antenna, including feed, depends largely on its size and the
materials used in its construction. These factors are in turn a function of the frequency
and beamwidth or gain. Table 13-16 lists some examples of satellite antenna weights,
showing that the more complex shaped-beam antennas have relatively high mass
because of their complex feed networks. Multiple and scanning beam antennas have
comparable masses.
The power efficiency and mass of a satellite transmitter are often key factors in
sizing a satellite. Figure 13-15 shows how the transmitter input power and mass varies
with output RF power, based on actual satellite equipment. We can see that the solid-

RF PowtIf output (W)

Fig. 13-15.

Satellite Transmitter Power and Mass vs RF Power Output. The curves derive
from actual ffight hardware. The data Is relatively independent of output frequency.

Table 13-17 lists the payload parameters for FireSat, based on the link budgets in
Table 13-13 and the payload characteristics found in Table 13-16 and Fig. 13-15.
These parameters also enter into the total satellite power and mass budget discussed in
Chap. 10•

13.5 Special Topics
This section discusses several special topics in selecting communications architectures.
13.5.1 Multiple Access: Sharing Communication Links
Some Dnssions may require more than one uplink or downlink, especially where
relay satellites have a number of satellites and ground stations interconnected in a siD-

576

Communications An:hiteeture

13.s

TABLE 13-17. CommunlcaUon Payload Parameters for RreSat. Parameters apply to

upfink and downlink.

Parameter
Frequency (GHz)
TransmlUer Output Power (W)
Number Beams and Transmitters
Antenna Beamwidth (deg)
Antenna Diameter (m)
Antenna Mass (kg)
TransmlUer Mass (kg)
TransmlUer Inp'ut Power (W)

both

Frequency

Frequency

RreSat

gle network. In such situations, it is cost effective to provide a means of sharing a limited amount of satellite link capacity between users.
Figure 13-16 shows three basic techniques for sharing link capacity. Frequency
division multiple access (FDMA) assigns a single carrier frequency for each input signal. Bandpass filters at the receiver separate the individual carriers from each other.
Most communications satellite systems use this technique with a repeater transponder
operating in a linear (back-off) mode. The ground station is less expensive because the
transmitter peak power is lower than the TDMA ground station described below.
Time division multiple access (1VMA) assigns a single time slot in each time frame
to a single input channel. A digitized input signal is sampled and stored in buffer memory. These samples are then transmitted as short bursts within the assigned time slots.
The bit rate during the burst is high, therefore requiring a high peak transmitter power.
At the receiver the samples are sorted and stored, and then read out at the original rate.
These samples are then converted to an analog signal and smoothed to obtain a replica
of the original input signal. Some systems, including Intelsat and DSCS-lli, use this
method for some of their users.
If the satellite uses a multiple-beam antenna, a switching matrix on the satellite may
be used with TDMA to route each time slot burst to the desired downlink antenna
beam. The NASA ACfS [Naderi and Kelly, 1988] uses this technique, known as Satellite Switched-1VMA (SS-1VMA). In some applications, the uplink uses the FDMA
technique, and the downlink uses the TDMA [McElroy, 1988]. This method requires
onboard processing (demodulation and remodulation) of the signal in the satellite, as
discussed below.
A third technique, code division mUltiple access (CDMA), consists of phasemodulating (BPSK or QPSK) a carrier with data, and then biphase-modulating the
carrier with a pseudorandom noise (PN) code. (See Fig. 13-17.) The data rate is much
lower than the PN code, or chip rate. Thus there are many code bits (or chips) per data
bit. The receiver has a code generator which replicates the PN code of the desired
signal on a carrier with frequency equal to the received carrier plus or minus an intermediate frequency (IF).
The PN codes are designed to have low cross-correlation properties (shown in
Fig. 13-17B) so that two or more signals can be transmitted simultaneously at the same
frequency with little mutual interference. Thus the received signals are essentially
uncorrelated with the locally generated PN code and appear as noise to the receiver,
except when identical received and locally-generated codes are aligned, or synchronized, in time. When this happens, the output of the mixer is a carrier containing only
the narrow-band data modulation, which passes through the IF bandpass filter (BPF)

Time

Technique

Up and Downlink
2.012.2

20
1
140
0.1
1.2
2.5
70

Special Topics

13.5

Frequency
DiVIsion
Multiple
Access
(FOMA)

Power

~ ~

0

T1m9

Power

T/TT1e
DMsion
Multiple

0

Frequency

Power

borne LLii.
0

T1m9

0

Frequency

Access
(TOMA)

Codes

Code
DivIsion
Multiple
Access
(CDMA)

Ag.13-16.

~

0

T1m9

Power

~
0

Frequency

577

Advantages

Disadvantages

• Continuous
• Multiple users
carrier
cannot share
transmission.
singletransmltter
wlthout mutual
• Peakand
Interference or
average power'
low power
equal.
efflclency.
• No complex
tlmlng.
• Requires
complex filter
• Modulation
banks to
rates
separate
comparable to
channels.
user data rates.
• DlfIlcult filtering
• Inexpensive
to separate large
ground
power users
staHons.
from adjacent
users.
• May require
power control.
• MulHple users
can share
single
transmitters
with high
eftlclency.
• Simple timing
logic easily
separates large
numbers of
lndMdual
users.
• Compatible
with beamhopped satenlte
antenna.
• Can handle
large power
variations
between users.

• Pulsed carrier
transmisslon
makes peak
power greatar
!han average.
• Requlras praclse
time
synchronization.
• Modulation burst
rates high
compared to
user data rates.
• RequIres
memory buffers.

• Relatively
immune to
transmHter
distortlon,
mulHpath and
Interference.
• Inherent
privacy.

• Umlted to low
data rates
relatlve to
transmlsslon
boundaries.
• Umlted number
of users cfue
to mutual
lntarIerence.
• Umlted variation
In power
dlIferences
between users.
• Needs
praclsetime
synchronization.

Multiple Access Techniques Allow Different Users to Share the Same
Transmission Channel.

(Fig. 13-17D). The PN code modulation is completely removed, leaving the desired
user signal "despread." At the same time, the sign~s from the und:sired users a~
at the output of the mixer as PN-coded signals WIth a spectrum WIdth roughly twIce
the PN-code rate, Therefore, only a small portion of the undesired signal will pass
through the narrow-band output BPF.

r
I

jj

I
!

Communic:atioDS Architecture

578

13.5

A
ToDa1a
Da1acJor

Data TransrnII!ed
by PSK ModuIaIIon

B

to

~

t4"

+J~_~_~
-1

0 0 0 I 0 0 I I 0 I 0 I I I I. ...

PNCode

579

Speclal Topics

13.5

As shown in Fig. 13-17B. the power density of the PN-coded signal at center
frequency is proportional to liRe (Re = lito). where Re is the chip rate. The spectrum
of the desired signal after despreading is proportional to lIR. where R is the data rate.
'Thus the power density of the desired signal is increased. relative to the power density
of an unspread interfering signal. by the ratio Re fR. This ratio is commonly referred
to as the coding gain of the spread-spectrum system.
Note that in order to receive the desired signal. the locally generated code must be
identical to the desired signal's code. and the two codes must be synchronized. We
may accomplish this synchronization by scanning the locally generated code in time
until synchronization takes place. To reduce the time to synchronize. a short code may
be used for acquisition. such as the CIA signal in GPS.
'The number of simultaneous users which the COMA system can handle is limited
by the noise generated by the undesired user signals. Suppose all COMA user code
rates and data rates are the same. and their carrier powers at the receiver input are
equal. How many users can the system support? Eq. (13-28) estimates the maximum
number of users. M, that the system can accommodate before the received energy-perbit, E"fNo. drops below threshold.

(13-28)

234 • • • •

P

1.=..1...

P

C

15

AuIocorreIation Function

1 RFCanler

f\JVVVV'

I:

Ii

,~~

AfVYY'
~

ReceWed
Slgnat4

Code
Refatence5

J\.N\j\J\Recovered
RFCanlerB

3 ModuIaIed
Canfer

1 Da1a Bft Many Code Bils Long

0

(6)

(4)

Interference
Level

'0

ReceWed SIgnat Plus
WIcIeband InImference and Noise

'0

IFBPF
0uIput

Fig. 13-17.

Direct-Sequence Spread-Spectrum Technique Used In CDMA System. The
numbers in C and 0 above refer to the block diagram In A.

where C/No is the received carrier-to-noise-density ratio from one user (Eq. 13-15a).
Rc is the PN-code chip rate. R is.the data rate. and Re is much greater than R. Note that
in Eq. (13-28) ClNo and E"fNo are power ratios, not dB.
An example of a COMA system is the GPS navigation message on the CIA signal.
Each satellite transmits a PN code with a different time phase. Re = 1.023 Mbps.
R 50 bps, Ei/No= 10 dB 10, and C/No 38.6 dB-Hz 7,244 Hz. Substituting into
Eq. (13-28), we obtain M 1,906 channels. This. of course. is much greater than the

=

=
=

=

=

actual number of channels required for GPS (less than 28).
Remember that M is the number of equal-power users. Suppose one user is received
with power 10 times greater than the other M-I users. If this is an undesired user, it
will generate interference equivalent to 10 undesired equal-powered users. thus reducing M by 9. For this reason an efficient COMA system often requires some automatic
means of controlling the transmitter power of each user.
The COMA system is generally less bandwidth-efficient than FDMA or TDMA.
On the other hand, the COMA system is less suSceptible to interference, including
multipath caused by reflections from buildings or other objects. This makes COMA of
special interest to satellite communication systems with mobile terminals. For more
information on multiple access techniques. see Morgan and Gordon [1989], Chap. 4.
Code division multiple access, COMA, is used by the Globalstar cellular telephone
satellite system in order to preserve spectrum. Each signal is 1.23 MHz wide. corresponding to the Cellular Telephone Industries Association Standard IS-95 for terrestrial cellular telephones. Up to 128 different signals can be "stacked" on the same
frequency channel by virtue of being biphase modulated by different pseudorandom
noise codes, or Walsh codes, as discussed above. The receiver recovers the signal by
applying the same code to the incoming signal. demodulating it If you divided this
band by 64 kHz. the bandwidth of a typical digital telephone signal. you get only 19
signals in the same bandwidth. In practice. the number of signals on a given channel
is limited to 30 to 50 because of satellite transmit power limitations.

580

Communications Architecture

13.s

13.5.2 Payloads with Onboard Processing

As discussed previously, communication relay satellites usually employ a repeater
transponder (also called a non-regenerative repeater or "bent pipe"), which receives
the uplink signals from all of the user transmitters operating in the assigned uPlink
frequency band, shifts the frequency to the downlink band, amplifies, and retransmits.
This transponder is reliable and simple to use. But this technique has several disadvantages when more than one signal is received at the same time. FlfSt, the transponder's
transmitter must operate as a linear amplifier to reduce mutual interference Caused by
intermodulation distortion. We must back off the input signals about 3 to 6 dB from
maximum, thus reducing the transmitter's power output to roughly one-half to onefourth of the maximum saturated pOwer. We do so by controlling the transponder gain
in the satellite (either automatically or by ground command), or by regulating each
ground station's transmitter power. Second, the strongest uplink signal will tend to
capture the satellite transmitter power, thus suppressing the weaker signals. This
makes the transponder particularly vulnerable to uplink jamming.
.
An alternative to the repeater transponder is the onboard processing transponder
or regenerative transponder. This transponder demodulates the received signal on
board the satellite, and then routes the signal to the appropriate downlink modulator/transmitter and antenna beam (see Fig. 13-18). An example of this architecture is
the Fleetsat Experimental Package developed for the Air Force by Lincoln Laboratory
[McElroy, 1988J. The FDMA technique is selected for the uplink to allow use of lowpower, ground-station transmitters as discussed above. The FDMA signals are
demodulated by the satellite transponder, and the messages are reformatted into a
single downlink TDMA data stream. TDMA is selected over FDMA for the downlink
to allow the satellite transmitter to operate at saturation for high power efficiency.
While more complex, the processing transponder overcomes the disadvantages of the
repeater transponder.

Repeater

Transponder

Fig. 13-18.

Two Payloads Commonly Used In CommunlcaUon-Satelllte Architectures. The
despreadlspreadlng capability Is used in military satellites to counter the effects of
jamming.

A large number of 20130 GHz synchronous (except for Teledesfc) satellites were
proposed to the FCC in August 1995. None has been licensed yet. They are listed in
Table 13-18. Most of these satellites plan to use advanced onboard signal processing
transponders. This allows onboard rerouting of the data, and improvement of the over-

581

Special Topics

13.5

all link performance because the noise of the uplink is not carried over to the downlink.
Many of these proposals promised digital data transmission of the order of 10-10 bit
rror rate with Ei/NoS on each link of the order of 5 dB. They used coding scheme such
~ those discussed in Table 13-11 and the accompanying text in Sec. 13.3.3.
TABLE 13-18.

20130 GHz FCC Proposals for Commercial Data Relay Satellites (Internet,
Telephone Trunklng).

r- Satellite Na.me
Norsat

Owner
Norwegian companies

Satellite Name

Owner

GEAmericom

General Bectric
Motorola

tSpaceway

Hughes

Motorola

I":feledesic

Teledeslc

KaStar

Cyberstar

Space SystemsILorai

Pan Am Sat

Pan Am SatJHughes

AT&T

AT&T

Net Sat 28

Net Sat

Lockheed Martin

Lockheed Martin

MorningStar

Cellular Vision
Echostar
Note: A total of 55 proposals have been med with the Intemational Telecommunlcatfons Union (ITU).

13.5.3 Antijam Techniques
Because the satellite is usually in view of a large segment of Earth, RF interference
from Earth-based transmitters, either unintentional or deliberate, may occur. The
frequency allocation procedures discussed previously minimize unintentional interference. Intentional interference, or jamming, is of particular concern in military
applications. Jamming consists of transmitting a large modulated carrier to the receive
terminal at approximately the same frequency, overwhelming the desired signal and
thus disabling the link.
We can reduce the effects of jamming by using spread-spectrum modulation
techniques [Dixon, 1984J to spread the transmitted signal in a pseudorandom manner
over a bandwidth much larger than the data rate. The receiver takes advantage of the
fact that he knows the code used to modulate the transmission while the jammer does
not A replica of the pseudorandom waveform is generated at the receiver and correlated with the received signal to extract the data modulation. Using this method, we
can reduce the received jamming power relative to the desired signal by the ratio of
the spread-spectrum bandwidth to the unspread signal bandwidth. For example, by
hopping a BPSK-modulated signal of 100 bps over 1 MHz, the jamming power, on the
average, is reduced by a factor of approximately 10,000, or 40 dB.
In a communication relay satellite, onboard processing is highly 4esirable to
despread the received signal before retransmitting it on the downlink. Otherwise the
uplink jamming signal will capture most of the satellite transmitter's power, leaving
little for the signal. Another technique for countering uplink jamming, employed by
the DSCS-ill, is to generate a null in the antenna beam pointed toward the jamming
source. This technique can lower the jamming power by 20 to 40 dB relative to the
power of the received signal.
The satellite crosslink may also be jammed. The satellite can reject jammers located
on Earth by using narrow antenna beams pointed away from the Earth. Operating at
60 GHz takes advantage of the oxygen absorption band, thus shielding the satellite
from the Earth. Crosslinks may also use spread-spectrum and antenna-nulling
techniques.

582

I

r

Communications Architecture

13.s

13.5.4 Security
A characteristic of space-ground communication is the ease with which the link can
be intercepted by an unauthorized user, who may receive the data for his own use, or,
even worse, take control of the satellite by transmitting commands to it Data encryption techniques help us avoid these problems by denying access to the data and the .
satellite command channel unless the user has the correct encryption key. Recent
developments have led to complete encryption and decryption devices being placed on
single VLSI chips, thus adding little to satellite mass. The main issues are distributing
the key and synchronizing time. To make sure a link remains secure over the life of
the satellite, the encryption key must change at regular intervals, because others will
monitor and eventually uncover it
The receiver decryption device must be accurately synchronized with the transmitter encryption device to recover the original data. With some systems, both the satellite
and ground station may need a very accurate atomic clock, especially if the data rate
is high and one must acquire the signal within seconds. For command links to stationary satellites, the data rate is low and the acquisition time can be long. For this
application, crystal oscillators are accurate enough. An alternative to atomic clocks is
a GPS receiver, which automatically synchronizes itself to the GPS time standard.
13.5.5 Diversity Techniques
Diversity techniques consist of transmitting or receiving the same signal more than
once to increase the probability of receiving the signal correctly. For example, a satellite may transmit a signal simultaneously to two ground stations. If the distance
between these ground stations is greater than about 5 km, the probability of high rainfall attenuation existing at both locations at the same time is small. This technique is
called spatial diversity and is an effective way to increase the availability of a satelliteground station link operating at frequencies above 20 GHz, where rain attenuation can
be large [Ippolito, 1986].
A second example of diversity is to transmit the same signal two or more times at
different frequencies or time intervals. For example, multipath fading may be caused
by reflections of the signal from parts of the aircraft structure in a satellite-ta-aircraft
link. The multiple reflected signals will interfere with the main signal, causing the
amplitude of the received signal to vary with frequency and time as the aircraft moves.
Use of frequency or time diversity will increase the probability that the message will
be received correctly in at least one frequency or time interval. In military applications,
frequency hopping over one data symbol provides frequency diversity protection
against partial band jllQlllling. Forward error correction coding followed by interleaving (e.g., scrambling the order in which the bits are transmitted) provides a form
of time diversity protection against a pulse jammer. Time interleaving improves the
decoding performance by randomizing a burst of errors caused by pulse jamming.
A third example of diversity is a technique used by Globalstar, "satellite diversity."
In this case a ground station talks to a UT with circuits through two separate satellites.
This is not to avoid.rain outages as discussed above, but rather outages caused by
blockage from buildings or trees for mobile UTs. If the path to one satellite is temporarily interrupted, the power is increased on the other link to maintain the contact
Also, when one satellite is "setting," this technique maintains the conversation through
the "other" satellite while a new ''rising'' satellite can begin to carry a circuit. In this
way, handover between satellites is transparent This is accomplished by using a
RAKE receiver. A RAKE receiver has the property of baving several parallel digital

Special Topics

13.5

processing channels whi~~ can ~rrect. for. Dopp~er frequency offset ~d time .delay so
as to combine several digttal SIgnalS m time alignment for the maxunum SIgnal-tonoise ratio. The technique requires two ground antennas, which are putting many
circuits through each satellite simultaneously.
13.5.6 Optical Links
In recent years lasers generating narrow band energy at optical frequencies provide
an attractive alternative to the microwave frequencies discussed above. Unfortunately,
clouds and rain seriously attenuate optical links. Therefore, optical links have limited
application in satellite-Earth communic~tions. Howev~, an.optica1link is well ~uited
for communication between two satellites. Intersatellite links have been designed
using optical links with capacities above 300 Mbps.
Optical crosslinks are superior to mi~wave cro~~ for ~gh data rates ~use
they can obtain extremely narrow beamWldths and high gams WIth reasonable SIZe (see
Fig. 13-19). Also, frequency allocation problems do not exist in the infrared or visual
bands. On the other hand, the narrow optical beams are difficult to acquire and point
accurately, requiring complex and sometimes heavy pointing mechanisms.
Figure 13-20 compares RF and laser crosslinks, demonstrating that RF links are
generally better for data rates less than about 100 Mbps because of their lower mass
and power. However, development of more efficient lasers and lighter steerable optics
may soon make lower rate optical links attractive.

10

..

'

0.1 LI-..L.L.JLU.LI..L-L-L.L.I.IJ.u.L8:-L..L.L.JWJI~7:--L...u..JJ.LL&.I:-...1....JL.LIJLU,.uO'9
104
10
10

Data Rate (bps)

Fig. 13-19.

Optical Systems (that Is, Direct Detection and Heterodyne) Require Smaller
Antenna Diameters Compared to RF Crossllnks. [Chan, 1988}.

One application of optica1links between satellites and Earth is the blue-green laser
link being developed by DARPA and the U.S. Navy for submarine communications
[Weiner,1980]. The laser frequency of 6 x 1014 Hz was chosen for its ability to penetrate sea water. Even so, the water loss can range from 5 to 50 dB or more, depending
upon the actual depth of the submarine. In addition, loss due to cloud scattering is

Communications Architecture

584

13.5

TABLE 13-19.

400

l!

100

F~

LEO

80

30

38149

W1deband data relay

GE'Star Plus

GEO

11

48

38149

W!deband data relay

Lockheed-MartIn

GEO

9

56

38149

W1deband data relay

Heterodyne

VStream

GEO

12

163

38149

WIdeband data relay

Laser (1 W)

Aster Systems

GEO

25

48

38149

W1deband data relay

MacroceU

LEO

96

228

2.012.2

Data relay to homefofflce

lCO Services

MEO

10

163

2.012.2

Data relay

Horizons

GEO

4

100-200

2.012.2

Data relay

MEO

16

:rT

2.012.2

AIrcraft data distribution

EIJIptIcaJ

127

2.012.2

Data relay

118

2.012.2

Data relay

23

2.012.2

Data relay

2.012.2

Data relay

•

LES819
(0.5 W @ 38 GHz)

0
104

10

106

5

10 7

106

10 9

Data Rate (bps)

Fig. 13-20.

between 4 to 14 dB. These losses are overcome by using low data rates of 10 to 100
bps, advanced coding techniques, and high-gain, narrow-beam optics.
Commercial satellites for both 2 GHz mobile satellite service and 38/49 GHz
trunking service have proposed use of optical intersatellite links between satellites for
efficient data transmission. They promise the advantages cited above in Figs. 13-19
and 13-20. A listing of these proposals is in Table 13-19.
TABLE 13-19. Communications Satellite Systems.

Orbit

No.
Satellites

No.
Antenna
Beams

GEO

4

204

MEO

20

GEO

14

204

38149

W1deband clata relay

SpaceCast

GEO

6

204

38149

W1deband data relay

Orbllnk

MEO

7

100

38149

W1deband data relay

CAl Satenite

GEO

1

5

38149

W1deband clata relay

Teledeslc V·band
Supplementary

LEO

72

64

38149

W1deband data to the
homeloffice

Celestri

LEO

72

64

38149

W1deband clata relay

GEO

6

Name

Star Lynx

Expressway

PentrJad
LE()'l
. Cyberpath

Boeing Aero Nav

Fn;auency
( Hz)

38149

No.

Celeat MSS HPCS

GEO

-

pCSAT

GEO

-

EJlIpsO 2G

A Comparison of Crosslink Package Weights. At data rates greater than about
100 Mbps, an optical system provides the lightest package [Chan, 1988].

System

No.
Antenna
Beams

200

~

Communications Satellite Systems. (Continued)

SateDItes

GS-40

9

=

585

Orbit

300

i

Special Topics

13.5

Function

LEO

64

96

GEO

4

64/469

Teledeslc

LEO

288

64

18130

InteJsat connecIIon to
home/busJness

Orl:x:omm

UttJe LEO

24

1

VHF

Store-and-forward comm relay

Starsys

UttJe LEO

24

1

VHF

Store-and-forward comm relay

G1oba1star GS-2

Function
W1deband clata relay
W1deband clata relay

MolnJya

9

-

38149

W1deband clata to homeloffice

LEO

48

28

38149

W1deband clata relay

GEO

4

-

38149

Wldeband clata relay

References
Chan, V.W.S. 1988. "Intersatellite Optical Heterodyne Communications Systems."
The lincoln Laboratory Journal, 1(2):169-183.
Chapell, Paul M. 1987. "Implementation of SOl Resources for Mll.SATCOM User
Support" In Conference Record, MILCOM 87: 20.6.1-20.6.5.
Crane, Robert K. 1980. "Prediction of Attenuation by Rain." IEEE Trans. on Communications. Com-28(9): 1717-1733.
Deng, Robert H., and Daniel J. Costello. 1989. ''High Rate Concatenated Coding
Systems Using Bandwidth Efficient Trellis Inner Codes." IEEE Trans. Comm.
Theory. 37(5): 420-427.
Dixon, Robert C. 1984. Spread Spectrum Systems (2nd edition). New York: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Gerson. Ira A., and Mark A. Jasiuk. 1990. "Vector Sum Excited Linear Prediction
(VSELP) Speech Coding at 4.8 Kbps." In International Mobile SateUite Conference. 678-683.

586.

Communications Architecture

13.5

Ippolito, Louis J., Jr. 1986. Radiowave Propagation in Satellite Communications.
New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Jasik, Henry, ed. 1961. Antenna Engineering Handbook. New York: McGraw-HilI.
Lee, Y.S. 1988. ''Cost-Effective Intersatellite Link App~cations to the Fixed Satellite
Services." In AlAA 12th International Communications Systems Conference.
Lo, Y.T. and S.W. Lee, eds. 1988. Antenna Handbook, Theory, Applications, and Design. New York: Van Nostrand Reinbold.
McElroy, D. 1988. "The FEP Communications System." In AlAA 12th International
Communication Satellite Systems Conference Proceedings, pp. 395-402.
Morgan, Walter L. and Gary D. Gordon. 1989. Commurzications Satellite Handbook.
New York: Jobo Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Mottley, T.P., D.H. Marx, and W.P. Teetsel. 1960. "A Delayed-Repeater Satellite
Communications System of Advanced Design." IRE Trans. on Military Electronics April-July: 195-207.
Naderi, M., and P. Kelly. 1988. ''NASA's Advanced Communications Technology
Satellite (ACTS)." In AlAA 12th International Communication Satellite Systems
Conference Proceedings, pp. 204-224.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration. 1983. Propagation Effects Handbook/or Satellite Systems Design. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office.
O'Shaughnessy, Douglas. 1987. Speech Communication, Human and Machine. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Co.
Panter, Philip F. 1965. Modulation, Noise, and Spectral Analysis. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Sklar, Bernard. 1988. Digital COT1l11lU1Jications Fundamentals and Application.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Ungerboeck, G. 1982. ''Channel Coding with MultiIeveIlPhase Signals." IEEE Trans.
Information Theory, vol. IT28, Jan., pp. 55-67.
Viterbi, AJ. 1967. ''Error Bounds for Convolutional Codes and an Asymptotically
Optimum Decoding Algorithm." IEEE Trans. In/ormation Theory. IT13:260-269.
Weiner, Thomas F., and Sherman Karp. 1980. "The Role ofBlueiGreen Laser Systems
in Strategic Submarine Communications." IEEE Transactions on Communications. Com-28(9): 1602-1607.
Yuen, Joseph H. ed. 1983. Deep Space Telecommunications Systems Engineering.
New York: Plenum Press.

Chapter 14
Mission Operations
John B. Carraway, Gael F. Squibb, Jet Propulsion Laboratory
Wiley J. Larson, United States Air Force Academy
14.1 Developing a Mission Operations Plan
14.2 Overview of Space Mission Operations Functions
14.3 Estimating the Size and Cost of Mission Operations
14.4 Automating Spacecraft and Ground Operations
Functions

Mission operations is the collection of activities performed by operations teams
during the flight phase of the mission, together with the operations design activities
they perform pre-launch, including development of a mission operations concept,
policies, data flows, training plans, staffing plans, and cost estimates. The mission
operations system is the integrated system of people, procedures, hardware, and software that must cooperate to accomplish these tasks. NASA, the DoD, industry, and
other organizations have different requirements for mission operations and each organization has developed it's own philosophy and style for carrying out the mission.
Mission operations focuses on the period after launch, but substantial work must be
done during all phases of mission design and development to prepare for operations.
Failing to take operations into account in preliminary mission design will significantly
increase both the cost and risk of the mission.
We must distinguish between the mission concept-how we conduct the overall
mission and how the elements of the mission fit together (Chap. 1~d the mission
operations concept-how we do operations to carry out the mission objectives. In this
chapter we define 13 key functions performed by mission operations (see Fig. 14-1)
and discuss how they combine to meet the mission operations concept. Hardware, software, people and procedures operate together to complete these 13 functions. We must
carefully trade automation against ground crew operation~n the ground and in
space. Automating some of these functions can lead to lower operations costs and, in
most cases, lower life-cycIe costs. Organizations may group or name these functions
differently, but we believe our list captures the tasks essential to mission operations.
The operations director must first define and negotiate the requirements on operations; then try to influence them to reduce cost and complexity. With requirements and
constraints in place, the director must decide which functions to do, as well as their
scope and how they can be done. Depending on the size and complexity of the mission,
a director may even have to add functions to the list. In addition, the director must
address organizational, hardware, and software interfaces between the functions.

587

11
I"

Mission Operations

588

589

10
MANAGING MISSION OPERlillON

sy

131

s

0
F

S
T

·r

w

E
M

A
R

E
N

E

G
I

D

G

E
V
E
l
0
P
M
E

I

T

T

&

N
E
E
R

I

N

N

N
E

G

R

Data

A

T
I
0

Payload

Processing

Cps

7

N

M
A
I
N

T
E

N

A

&

N

T

C
E

E

s

T

In

COMPUTER & COMMUNICATION SUPPORT

12

Fig. 14-1. ~ 1.3 Functions of Mission Operations System and How they Interact. Functions In the shaded area share data within the mission database. We briefly discuss
the~ in Sec. 142. Functions 4, 8, and 9 are part of a broader category called data
servrces.

Figure 14-1 overviews a mission operations system that carries out the mission
operations concept. This system processes infonnation and'controls the ground and
space assets so users and operators get needed infonnation and services. Most
missions today focus on providing infonnation to users or customers-the downlink.
But control drives much of the cost and complexity of operations-the uplink. We will
see this in the following sections.
There is a fund~ental differen~e in mindset between designers and operators of
space systems: DesIgners expect thI?~ to work; operators expect things to go wrong!
Both perspectives are necessary. MISSIon operators usually help develop the mission
co~cept, but they often get involved too late-long after the initial design phase in
which te~ can make co~t-effe<;tive .choices. Operators should get involved early
enough !o ~fluence plannmg and d~Ign, so they can reduce the life-cycle costs of
space ~sslOns. They ~elp develop flIght rules, which govern operators' responses to
anomalies and ensure timely responses consistent with mission success.
Figure 14-1 shows 13 mission operation functions. We can combine or eliminate
some of them to reduce cost and complexity. Nine share data through the mission
database and the space element's avionics and they require extensive data processing:
1. Mission planning-deciding what to do and when
2. Activity planning and development--creating operational scenarios and developing command loads
3. Mission control-managing daily activities

4. Data transport and delivery-establishing communication links and managing
data flow
5. Navigation and orbit control-detennining where the spacecraft is and planning maneuvers
6. Spacecraft operations-managing the spacecraft bus
7. Payload operations-managing the spacecraft's payload
8. Data processing-managing the data flow on the spacecraft and on the ground
9. Archiving and maintaining the mission database-managing all data generated
by the mission
The order from upper left (mission planning) clockwise to lower left reflects the usual
order in processing: analyzing uplinks, analyzing downlinks, and then planning new
uplink activities. The other four functions provide support for all aspects of mission
operations:
10. Systems engineering, integration, and test-maintaining the mission operations
concept
11. Computers and communications support-planning for and maintaining the
infrastructure
12. Developing and maintaining software-spread throughout all functions
13. Managing mission operations-maintaining the big-picttIre perspective, managing interfaces, and budget
A big question is, "How many people must we have to do mission operations?" The
obvious answer is, "It depends." It depends on the organization's operational requirements and constraints, as well as the number and complexity of functions, complexity
of the mission design, complexity of flight and ground systems, and how much risk the
operations organization will take.
The number of operations people required can vary significantly between military,
commercial, and scientific spacecraft and can vary significantly between individual
missions within each category. The cost difference between a 5 person operations team
and a 50 person operations team is 6 to 7 million dollars per year. This chapter will try
and identify how differences in payload and spacecraft design, space environment,
ground systems, the ops organization design, and risk policies can influence operations costs.
Section 14.1 describes a process for operations design and development. We
emphasize the importance of defining an early operations concept to clarify requirements on the operations system. Anned with these requirements, we can meet goals
for operations costs by negotiating with the other space mission elements to reduce
their operational complexity, thus keeping costs acceptable across the full mission life
cycle. Once we've iterated through the process, gotten costs within guidelines, and
developed a workable mission operations concept and design, we can more effectively
deal with the cost drivers for mission operations.
Section 14.2 defines mission operations in terms of 13 functions that are common
across a wide variety of mission types and operations team sizes. Analyzing each
function helps us understand recent trends in trying to reduce costs and in automation.
Section 14.3 then discusses what determines the size and cost of space mission
operations.

r

590

Mission Operations

14.1

J

II

'• !'.

,I

,

~·

f

·i·.

I

I

I

We're now converting functions that people have done into ones that hardware and
software can do. We're also moving onto the spacecraft parts of operations functions
traditionally done on the ground Using software in place of people doesn't always
save money but we need to assess this option. Section 14.4 provides some guidelines
and insights about high payoffs from investments in operations technology and
automation.
For a detailed discussion of the design of mission operations for scientific remote
sensing missions, see Wall and Ledbetter [1991]. Because of the continuing pressure
to contain cost. a number of authors has described methods for operations cost reductions on both individual missions [Bloch, 1994; Mandl et al., 1994; van der Ha, 1992]
and various classes of missions [Cameron, Landshof, and Whitworth, 1994; Hughes,
Shirah, and Luczak. 1994; Landshof, Harvey, and Marshall, 1994]. Much of this cost
reduction strategy has been summarized by Boden and Larson [1995] and Marshall,
Landshof, and van der Ha [1996].

14.1 Developing a Mission Operations Plan
For unmanned space missions the Mission Operations Plan (MOP) describes in
operators' and users' tenns the operational attributes of the flight and ground-based
elements. The plan usually results from the cooperative work of several disciplines. Its
development is similar to that of a space mission concept but the MOP is more detailed
and emphasizes the way we operate the mission and use the flight vehicle (operational
characteristics), crew, and ground operations team. It is generated in phases and
becomes more detailed as our mission design progresses.
The MOP follows from. and must be consistent with, the mission concept It is one
of the most important deliverables from the mission operations organization before
launch. A good MOP helps assure that the operations organization provides a tested
and certified mission operations system that meets requirements at the lowest cost The
operations organization and management also use the MOP as their main tool to influence the design and operability of the mission and spacecraft. Its iterative development
often changes the mission concept. flight vehicle, and software, both flight and
ground. By combining the operations concept with assessments of operational
complexity, we can determine the probable costs of operations early in the mission
design. Table 14-1 outlines the steps needed to develop a useful MOP.
Step 1. Identify the Mission Concept, Supporting Architecture. and
Key Performance Requirements

We begin developing the MOP by examining the mission concept and supporting
architecture. By obtaining the information listed below, we can describe the mission
in language that users and operators understand. Sometimes information isn't available. Sometimes, the operations design isn't very far along or isn't specified in the
mission architecture. In these cases, we make assumptions and document them in the
MOP. Of course, we update the MOP as the assumptions change or more data becomes
available. We can then determine the cost of changes by modifying the operations concept and re-evaluating the cost and complexity of the mission operations.
Mission objectives identify what the ground crew, spacecraft. and payload must do
for mission success. They help us derme and descn"be how people will use the payload
data. We also need to know the timeliness requirements for payload-processed data
and the mission's overall criteria for success, such as the amount of data to be returned.

Developing a Mission Operations Plan

14.1

591

TABLE 14-1. Developing a Mission Operations Plan. Many items are detailed by Boden and
Larson [1995]. See text for a discussion of each step.
I

Step

Key Items

1. Identify the mission concept,
supporting architecture, and
performance requirements
(Chap.1)

•
•
•
•

Mission scope, objectives, and payload requirements
Mission philosophies, strategies, and tactics
Characteristics of the end-to-end information system
Identify performance requirements and constraints

2. Determine scope of functions
needed for mission operations
(Sec. 142)

• Identify functions necessary for different mission phase
• Functions usually vary for different mission concepts and
architectures. Combine or eliminate if possible

3. Identify ways to accomplish
functions and whether
capability exists or must be
developed (Sec. 142)

•
•
•
•
•

4. Do trades for items identified
in the previous step.

• Try to define operational scenarios before selecting
options. These trades occur within the operations element
and include the flight software

Where functions are accomplished (space or ground)
Space-based crew capabi6ties
Degree of automation on the ground
Degree of autonomy on spacecraft and for flight crew
Software reuse (space and ground)

5. Develop operational scenarios • Operations scenarios and flight techniques are step-byand flight techniques
step activity deSCriptions. Identify key issues and drivers
• Develop scenarios and flight techniques for functions from
step 2 and options selected in step 4
6. Develop timelines for each
scenario

• Timelines identify events, their frequency, and which
organization is responsible. They drive the characteristics
for each operations function

7. Determine resources needed
for each step of each scenario

• Allocating hardware, software, or people depends on
what, how quickly, and how long functions must be done

8. Develop data-flow diagrams
(Sec 2.1.1)

• Data-flow diagrams drive the data systems and the
command, control, and communications architecture

9. Characterize responsibilities
of each team

• Identify organizations Involved and their structure,
responsibility, interfaces, and size. To ba cost-effective,
minimize the number of organizations and interfaces
• Develop training plan for ground team and flight crew

10.Assess mission utility,
complexity, and operations
cost driver

• Refine development and operations costs each time you
update the Mission Operations Plan

11.ldentify derived requirements

• Identify derived requirements and ensure consistency
with top-level requirements
• Identify cost and complexity drivers
• Negotiate changes to mission concept and architecture

12. Generate technology
development plan

• If the technology to support mission operations doesn't
exist, generate a plan to develop it

13. Iterate and document

• Iteration may occur at each step
• Document decisions and their reasons

I
I

, ,

i

592

Mission Operations

14.1

The mission description tells us the trajectory, launch dates and windows, trajectory profile, maneuver profile needed to meet mission objectives, mission phases, and
the activities required during each phase. Observation strategies describe how we'll
collect the mission data. We define and finalize the observation strategies and mission
description before launch or adapt them to data gathered during the mission.
Sometimes, the operations organization develops the operating philosophies, strategies, and tactics. They may relate to the mission objectives or simply derive from the
designer's background or experience. We must determine whether the philosophies
strategies, and tactics are mandatory, highly desirable, or just personal or organiza~
tional preference. Examples include
• Maximize real-time contact and commanding versus onboard autonomy and
data-storage
• Maximize the involvement of educational institutions and teach students key
aspects of issues like operations or space physics
• Make sure a central authority approves all commands
• Limit the image budget to 50,000 images
• Deploy a communications satellite early in the mission
The mission sponsor and the project manager may impose nontechnical constraints. Operators usually follow these constraints until the project manager learns
they increase the mission's cost or make operations unacceptable or unsafe. Examples
of program constraints include
• Limit mission cost and cost profiles
• Use a specific tracking network (for example, TDRS)
• Use existing flight hardware
• Use existing ground systems and design the spacecraft to be compatible with
them
• Centralize or distribute operational teams
• Use multi-mission versus project-dedicated tearns
• Involve educators and the academic community, including students
We must identify capabilities and characteristics of the end-ta-end information
system early on so we clearly understand the mission's information' needs. These
requirements at the system level include
• Using information standards
• Locating capabilities and processes (includes both space and ground)
• Characterizing inputs and outputs for the information systems
We must state the information systems requirements in terms that operators and
users can understand, not in jargon used by computer scientists and programmers.
As discussed in Chap. 15, most missions are designed around a specific agency's
ground system, such as the Air Force's Satellite Control Network, NASA's Satellite
Tracking and Data Network (STDN), or the European Space Operations Center. Each
ground system has standard services that support the mission at lower cost if the

14.1

Developing a Mission Operations Plan

593

mission meets specified interfaces and standards. We follow these requirements on the
flight system until they hinder our ability to meet mission objectives.
This first step is key to the overall success and cost of mission operations. Here we
gain insight about what to do and why. We begin determining performance requirements and constraints that will drastically affect the mission's cost and complexity. If
we get the requirements wrong, we get the system wrong.
Step 2. Determine Scope ofFunctioDS Needed for Mission OperatioDS
Before deciding how functions must be done, we usually divide the mission into
discrete, workable phases such as launch, early orbit, normal operations, entry,
descent, and landing. These phases usually have distinct goals and objectives, so their
operational requirements are different. The mission concept drives top-level functions,
but abilities of the crew, spacecraft, and payload determine the detailed functions we
must carry out. A completely autonomous payload requires few crew operations,
whereas a spacecraft payload that can't compute or store enough data onboard may
require more control or automation on the ground. Thus, to determine what we must
do, we have to understand characteristics of the spacecraft bus and payload. Characteristics essential to the mission concept may become clear early in the conceptual
design phase. Or we may develop them as part of the Mission Operations Plan.
Through iterative discussions, the operators and developers define the characteristics
described below.
Users often ask operators to support a wide variety and number of payloads during
a mission. Including payload designers and mission planners while developing the
mission concept leads to timely definition of the payload characteristics. For a
multiple-payload mission, we must understand early how each payload's constraints
interact with the operations of other payloads and the ground system.
To understand how a payload operates, we must describe what the payload does
during an operational period by asking
• What are the payload attributes?
• What is the commanding philosophy-buffer use, micrO-commands, tables?
• Does the payload use default values? Can ground operators change them?
• Can some commands damage the payload or endanger the spacecraft?
• Do some operations depend on previous commands?
• Does the payload use position commands or incremental commands to control
rotating or stepping mechanisms?
• What command classes does the payload use-real-time, stored, 2-stage?
• What processing occurs within the instrument?
• How can we describe the payload in terms of
- CPU/memory, closed-loop functions, and predictive commanding vs. eventdriven commanding?
- Instruments the space element must control?
- Mechanical power and thermal attributes?
- Avoidance areas (Sun, Earth, South Atlantic Anomaly, Venus, or Moon)?
- Requirements for controlling the space element?
- Safety constraints?

594

Mission Operations

14.1

• Do the payload apertures drive the space vehicle's pointing control?

•
•
•
•

What are the user-specified parameters for operation?
How do these parameters convert into payload commands?
What is the payload heritage?
What ground processing and analysis do we need to support its operation?

The example below shows how planning payload operations helps us define the
mission concept. It also shows how operational workarounds support mission success.

14.1

Developing a Mission Operations Plan

595

• What types of payload, ground and spacecraft system margins exist and which
must be monitored and controlled in real time?
• What expendables need monitoring during flight?
• Does the spacecraft subsystem use any onboard, closed~loop functions?
• What are the attributes of the spacecraft's data system?
• What processing must we do on the ground to support spacecraft operations?
• What is the heritage for each of the spacecraft's subsystems?

An instrument's aperture bad a field of view of ten arc-sec. The spacecraft bad pointing
capability of 20 arc-sec. In this case, the operators could never be sure the object was in the
instrument's field of view. The solution was to:
• Command the spacecraft to the desired position
• Observe with a different instrument baving a wider field of view to see bow far the
spacecraft was off the desired position
• Generate attitude commands to move the spacecraft slightly (tweak commands) until
the actual attitude corresponded to the desired attitude
• Verify the attitude errors were gone
• Select the instrument with the narrow aperture and ob,serve as specified
This single design error cansed real-time operations, sucb as decision making and commanding, to become nonroutine for this missio~ big cost driver. These operations required more
ground software, controllers trained in commanding the attitude-control system, and more
people wbenever they used the instrument The goal of generating a MOP is to identify early
any incompatibilities and cost drivers like this one-before we design and build any hardware.
I

I

I

It's a good idea to ask the designer of a payload instrument how to go from an
observer requirement to a set of commands for the instrument Sometimes, the answer
is simple, but it could be complex if instruments have been designed for a laboratory
rather than for space operation.
As is trUe for the payload's capabilities and characteristics, timely definition of the
spacecraft's characteristics depends on including spacecraft designers and mission
planners in developing the mission concept People working on the concept have to
answer the following types of questions for the overall spacecraft and its subsystems:
• What are the spacecraft's operational attributes?
• How are the values of these commands determined?
• How many commandable states are required?
• Are engineering calibrations required? What are the purpose, frequency, and
schedule constraints of the calibrations?
• How many engineering channels need monitoring?
• Do these channels provide subsystem-level information to the operators, or

must operators derive information about subsystems?
• Are guide stars used? If so, how are they selected?

• How does the pointing-control accuracy compare to instrument requirements?

Consider an example of how a simple design decision affects opemtions:
The Galileo spacecraft was designed to take heat from the radioisotopic thermoelectric generators and use it to warm the propulsion
system. This design saved weight and power, and it cost less to
develop. But the spacecraft's operational characteristics tied together
subsystems for propulsion health and safety, thermal transfer, an~
power. Operators had to check each command load to see how It
changed power states and affected the propulsion subsystem. Engineers from power, thermal, and propulsion had to check each activity,
even if only the payload instrument's states changed. For example,
turning an instrument on or off caused the heat output of the thermoelectric generator to change.
This example shows that highly-coupled subsystems can make operating the system
more complex and c~stly.
.
We must work with the end-users or customers to determme how, and how often,
they require data from the payload. We also need to identify key operator tasks to
operate the payload successfully. By understanding these data products and ~
actions, we can start designing how to operate the payload, as well as to retneve and
process the data.
We must understand how confident the end-users are about the products. Often,
they don't know what they want until they see how the payload works in flight and
what it observes. In these cases, we must develop baseline processes before launch and
refine them after launch. For attached and deployable payloads from manned spacecraft. the payload must be mature enough to ensure no safety risks exist, either within
a payload, or with another payload running simultaneously. We must develop early !he
procedures for payloads that we can maintain in flight, so we can use them during
stand-alone and integrated crew training.
We also need to define the product's relationship to the payload data by answering
the following questions:
• Is the product based on the payload's raw data or must we remove the payload
instrument's signatures?

• Must the data be calibrated? How? Does it involve processing special calibration observations? At what rate do we expect the calibration ftIes to change?
• Does the data need to be converted into geophysical units? How? Where do
the algorithms for this conversion come from? Must the project generate them
and update the mission database, as they become more refined?

S!J6

Mission Operations

14.1

• What are the formats and media of the payload's data products? Is there a
community standard, such as the Flexible Image Transport System format
used on all NASA's astrophysics missions?

Developing a Mission Operations PIan

14.1

TABLE 14-2. Identifying Where to Carry Out Functions. Using a table simnarto this one helps
us identify options for carrying out mission operations. We assume functions not
included in table are done on the ground. As you evaluate each function, place a
check mark In the table to show where you complete the function.

• What ancillary data must we provide so the end-user can interpret the payload
data-spacecraft position and attitude, ground truth, or crew commentary?
• Who processes the payload data-project or end user?

597

Where AccompOshed
MOSFuncUon

Spacecraft Avionics

Ground

• How is the processed data archived-through the project or end user? How is
quality of the product controlled?

Mission PlaMing

Operator augmented with
automated tools Is primary

• What, if anything, must the project archive after the flight phase is over? How
long must information be stored?

ActivitY Planning
and Development

Operator augmented with
automated tools Is primary

Mission Control

Operator is primary

Planners and payload engineers must consider these issues jointly to understand
opemtionally what will occur during flight
Step 3. Identify Ways to Accomplish Functions and Whether Capability Exists
or Must Be Developed

At this level, many functions and the ways to do them are straightforward. For
example, to track an interplanetary spacecraft, we use NASA's Deep Space Network.
For other functions, we must identify options and describe them. For example, to
determine a spacecraft's orbit, we might use the Global Positioning System and automated procedures on board, or we might track the spacecraft from the ground and
calculate its orbit on the ground. Mainly, we must decide where the prime responsibility for each function li~nboard autonomy, ground-based operators, or automated
functions. Then we must review our decisions in light of the capabilities on board and
on the ground, as well as how critical the action is.
To understand options, try building a table that contains the opemtions functions
which apply to the mission's database and space element's avionics. Then, identify
whether the avionics (automated) or the mission opemtions system are to do each function. If functions must be done on the ground, further determine whether the hardware,
software, or operators should complete it. If a function could be done in more than one
place, describe what to do in each place and options for doing it. Table 14-2 shows how
such a table would look.
If the ground hardware and software do something, ask, "Could the avionics
partially or completely do this function and lower the mission's life-cycle costs?" For
example, if we were considering orbit determination, we'd ask, "Could we determine
the spacecraft location within the avionics?' Then, we'd look at the accuracy of the
GPS system, check the cost of GPS receivers that are flight qualified, and do a frrstorder estimate of the change in life-cycle costs compared to a more typical approach.
Don't forget that the costs of tracking facilities are important in this type of trade. The
longer the mission, the. more ground systems cost
Step 4. Do Trades for Items Identified in the Previons Step

For the options identified in step 3 that drive either performance or cost, a small
group of opemtors, crew and designers need to do trades and decide how to carry them
out. At this point these trades should involve areas that are very costly, controversial,
or not well understood. In some cases, we may develop an operations scenario for each
option to descn"be it in detail. Usually, these trades result in a traditional allocation of

Data Transport
and Delivery

Many LEO telecommunications
spacecraft implement much of this
function onboard

Software and hardware
provide primary capability

Navigation and Orbit
Control

Software and hardware on spacecraft Software and hardware is
is an option
primary

Spacecraft Operations

Short- and long-term planning
by operators, augmented with
automated tools

Payload Operations

Short- and long-term planning
by operators, augmented with
automated tools

functional responsibilities to the flight crew, avionics, and opemtors. The key here is
to look for approaches that truly minimize Jife-cycle cost without jeopardizing the
safety and reliability of the mission and systems.
Step 5. Develop Operational Scenarios and Flight Techniqnes

Operational scenarios are key to an operations concept. A scenario is a list of steps,
and we can often describe a mission opemtions concept with several dozen top-level
scenarios. Typically, we genemte three types of scenarios:

• User Scenario-How the user interacts with the system elements and receives
data.

• System Scenario-How systems and subsystems within an element work
together.
• Element Scenario-How the elements of the space mission architecture work
together to accomplish the mission.
During the early study phases of a mission, users develop a scenario to show how
they want to acquire data and receive products from the payload. For a science mission, the user would be the principal investigator or science group or, for a facility
spacecraft such as the Hubble Space Telescope, an individual observer.
We create a system scenario after we've developed the opemtions architecture.
Here, we emphasize the .steps within a process needed to conduct the mission. Finally,

598

Mission Operations

14.1

during element design, we expand these system scenarios to include more detailed
information and subsystems. Once we have created scenarios for the user, system, and
element, we must integrate them to understand what happens throughout the mission and make sure we've included all key activities and eliminated overlaps. The
scenarios give us our first look at how our system operates as a unit to produce the
mission data.
The mission concept, Mission Operations Plan, and design of the space and ground
elements are closely related. As design proceeds, we should keep cost in mind and
recognize that engineers normally focus on the technical challenge, with costs secondary. All participants in the conceptual design not only must keep cost in mind, but
should view it as a design variable. As designs mature for all elements of the space
mission architecture, we must do trade studies to get the most cost-effective mission
design. If the budget is constrained, which it usually is, we must look for ways to
reduce costs by changing the mission concept, mission requirements, and potentially,
the mission's overall objectives.
Step 6. Develop TimeUnes for Each Scenario

Now we can add times needed to do each set of steps and determine which steps
can run in parallel or have to be serial. This information becomes a source of derived
requiiements for the mission operations system's performance.
Many different timeline tools are used. None is standard, but many are modified
from commercial, off-the-shelf software. Most missions use the same timeline tools
for operational scenarios and activity planning. For many smaller payload users,
asking for planning support from the MCC is less expensive than investing in a parallel
planning system. These requirements must fit within the scope of the agreements
among the program, operations, and the user. In many cases, the MCC has already
required information that it can make available to you. In other cases, teams must
generate ancillary data or change plans to fit unique needs for payload planning. If
these changes are extensive, a separate planning system may be the effective solution.
Step 7. Determine the Resources Needed for Each Step of Each Scenario

Once we've developed scenarios, we may assign machines or people to do each
step. This choice is obvious for many steps, but people or machines may do others,
depending on performance requirements and available technology. The trend is
toward automation on the ground and autonomy in space. We must be careful to identify, as specifically as possible, which tasks the flight crew should do.
Having allocated resources (hardware, software, or people), we must assign steps
to hardware and software within data-flow diagrams. For steps assigned to people, we
select an existing organization or develop an operational organization and assign steps
and functions to teams.
At this point, we examine each step to which we've assigned an operator and ask,
"Can this process be automated to eliminate the operator?" How? Allow a person to
do something only when the complexity or flexibility or life-cycle costs mandate
human involvement. Don't accept the idea that we need a person because we've
always done it that way. Technology is advancing so rapidly that a machine may very
well do now what a person had to do on the last mission. Through this process, we'll
also discover areas on which to focus research and development funding for possible
automation in future missions.

14.1

Developing a Mission Operations Plan

599

Step 8. Develop Data-flow Diagrams

System-engineering tools can convert machine steps into data-flow diagrams
showing processes, points for data storage, and interrelationships. They also generate
a data dictionary that ensures a unique name for each process or storage point in the
data flow. These computer-aided systems engineering tools then generate information
you can use for development. One of the most effective actions you can take to reduce
overall life-cycle cost is to understand where data originates and the flow it takes
throughout your system to the end user or customer and to your archive. Figure 2-2 in
Sec. 2.1.1 shows a top-level data-flow diagram for FrreSat.
Step 9. Characterize Responsibilities of Each Team

Once we've defined functions and processes, gathered the people-related steps,
and formed an organization around them, we can assign teams to the steps and analyze
the organization to establish operational interfaces. Generally, the more inputs we get
from different teams, the more complicated, costly, and slow the operations organizations are. The goal of this step is to identify the number of people required to do
mission operations during each mission phase. We'll use this information to estimate
the cost of operations. We should be open to approaches and trade-offs that reduce
overalllife-cycle cost
Step 10. Assess Mission Utility, Complexity, and Operations Cost Drivers

To assess mission utility, we follow the overall process defined in Sec. 33. To do
so early in design !pay require flexible simulations, in which input parameters and system parameters have a range of values. Operational simulations that produce outputs
which meet mission objectives are candidates fOr the Mission Operations Plan. As the
plan matures, assessing mission utility yields confidence in the design or highlights
shortcomings for re-design.
To assess operations complexity and how it drives mission operations cost, we use
a complexity model that shows the relationship between operational parameters and
full time equivalent operators. This model requires us to evaluate each of our operational activities as low, medium, or high complexity. Then, based on previous missions of the same class, the model produces the number of operations personnel.
During design, this model gives us rules for trade studies to reduce operations costs.
Boden and Larson [1996, Chap. 5] describe this model in detail. See Sec. 14.3 for a

summary.
Step 11. Identify Derived Requirements

At this point, we've updated the Mission Operations Plan with new information
associated with the mission operations concept, requirements, existing and new capa-

bilities, scenarios, timelines. and the anticipated life-cycIe cost Now, we can identify
new or derived requirements necessary to reduce cost and complexity and enhance the
safety and reliability of operations. We should document these derived requirements
in the Mission Operations Plan, being careful to identify what is to be done-not
how-and why the requirements are necessary. Then, we should co~unicate the
derived requirements to the group that develops the mission's conceptual design and
negotiate them into the requirement baseline.

600

MIssion Operations

14.2

Step 12. Generate a Tecbnology Development Plan

The technology to support a mission operations concept may not exist or may not
be focused and prototyped appropriately for mission approval. With each iteration of
the Mission Operations Plan, we must identify needed or risky technology, sp someone can develop the technology or create work-arounds.

Overview of Space MIssion Operations Functions

14.2

subteams may form; each dedicated to one of the functions in the table. On some
projects, a single subteam does several of the functions, whereas another subteam may
do only a part of one function.
TABLE 14-3. Functions and Attributes for Space Mission Operations.

Step 13. Iterate and Document
Function

The last, and usually most painful, step is to document the results of the iteration
through the Mission Operations Plan to develop a baseline from which we can COntinue to improve and reduce life-cycIe cost The documentation should include at least
these elements:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Requirements and mission objectives
Key constraints--cost, schedule, and technical performance
Assumed mission and flight rules
Scenarios~iescribed in terms of functions
Tnnelines for each key scenario
Ground and flight crew tasks
Organization and team responsibilities and structure
Hardware and software functions
Data-flow diagrams
Payload requirements and derived requirements

Remember that this document is the basis for communicating the overall operations
approach to users, operators, and system developers. If done and used properly, it can
help save millions of dollars in the design and operation of space systems. We strongly
recommend keeping the Mission Operations Plan in electronic form and making it
readily available to all members of the conceptual design team, so they can keep the
big picture in mind as they further develop concepts, systems, and approaches. The
earlier the fIrst Mission Operations Plan appears. the greater the leverage for reducing
life-cycle costs.
Now that we understand how to develop a Mission Operations Plan. we need a
more detailed understanding of what mission operators do, so we can create a better
and more detailed plan.

1. Mission
Planning

2.ActMty
p/anning&
Development

Key Responslbnltles

Inputs

° Coordinate science, ° Planning

trajectory, and
requests
engineering plans
° Science
° Allocate and manap'e objectives
mission consumab es ° Eng. &nav.
constraints
° Mission
performance
melrics

Opso:mn
Conslde ons

OUtputs
• Activity
timelines
° Activity
Pl!Iflning
guidelines
° Mission rules

• Number and
complexity of
flight rules?
° Consurnables,
performance,
and tbnellne
margins?

° Integrate activity plan ° Right rules
° ActIvity Plan
° Activity Plan
requests
review products duration?
° Guidelines from
° Develop timemission planning • Spacecraft
° Quantity and
command load
Ord~ constraint· ° Activity timelines
quality of
check activities
constraint
°
Ground
activity
° Activity Plan
checks?

schedule

requests

° Activity lave!:

over vs. under·
subscribed?

3. Mission
Control

° Monitor In real-time
° Command In reaI-

° Telemetry alarm ° Pass reports
° Around the
Hmits
clock staffing?
° Real·time
time
° Real·time
commands
° Joystick vs.
command
° Configure and control
° Ground system stored seq. ops?
ground data system

requests

schedule

° Ground system

availability times

4. Data Delivery - See Function (8)

5. Navigation &
Orbit Control

° Design trajectories or • Radiometric data ° Tra~Ories or ° Trajectory
orbits
orb
accuracy reqs?
° Optical
° Determine position
navigation data ° P~. maneuver ° PropeOant
and velocity
d gns
margin?
° Ephemerides
° Design maneuvers • Spacecraft
° Antenna
• Disturbance
P~Ulsion

pe

6. Spacecraft

Operations

7. Payload
operations

projects

force
complexity?

° Fault response

rmance

° Ensure spacecraft

° Spacecraft

° Spacecraft

° Calibrate the

° Activity PIan

° Consumables

safety and health

engineering data

spacecraft and
review products
establish engineering ° Right system
performance
teslbed data
° Analyze anomalies
° Maintain flight
software

14.2 Overview of Space Mission Operations Functions
Although space mission types vary widely across military, scientifIc. and commercial applications. flight teams on the ground operate with fairly common tasks and
activities. In this section we'll describe these common operational tasks and then show
how mission differences can influence performance requirements and hence the styles
and costs of accomplishing the tasks.
Figure 14-1 at the beginning of the chapter shows 13 functions for space mission
operations. Table 14-3 summarizes the associated attributes of these functions. For
small projects. members of a single team may do these tasks. For larger projects,

601 .

° Ensure payload

safety and health

° Payload

engineering data

° Calibrate the payload ° Activity Plan
review products
° Do quick-look
payload analysis

constraints
status

° ActIvity Plan
requests

° Real-time

command
requests

°

paYIOad~s.

and con

nts

vs. fault
prediction
trending?
• Spacecraft
performance
margins?
° Significant postlaunch software
development?

° Payload

complexity?

° Activity Plan

° Payload

° Real·time

° Numberand

requests

command

requests

Interactlvity?

complexity of
outputs?

~

,I

Mission Operations

14.2

TABLE 1~3. Functions and Attributes for Space Mission Operations. (Continued)
Function
S. Data Servo
Inctudes:
(4)Data Delivery;
(S)Data

Processing;

(9)ArchMng and
Maintaining
Database
10.~tem

gineering
& Integration
and Test

Key ResponslbDItfes
o

o
o

o
o

o

Receive, stage,
transport, process,
display, and archive
data
Transmit commands
Manage computer,
comm. and database

Inputs
Noisy telemetry
data
Radiometric data
Ground system
monitor data
Command files

Detected
telemetry data
o
o Processed
engineering
o
data
o
Processed
o
payload data
o Transmitted
command data
Manage extemal
o System technical o Operations
Interfaces
requirements and concept
constraints
Manage system
o Interface
o Optimization
agreements
rmrformance and
ntemallnterfaces
goals
o I&Tplans
Recover from system o EngIneering
o Test results
failures
change requests
o

OPSD2n
Conslde
ns

Outputs
o

o
o
o
o

o

o

o

11. Computer
and Communication
Support
12. Software Development&
Maintenance

o
o

o
o
o

Maintain the
hardware
Maintain data links
Maintain the system
Upgrade the system
Train and certify
operators

o
o

o
o
o

Anomaly reports
OUtage reports

New req's .
Approved eng.
change requests
Continuous
Improvement
Initiatives

o

o
o
o

Maintenance
and upgrade
plans

Development
plans
Training plans
New, In;:croved
capabH" es

o
o

o
o
o
o

13. Management • Manage the overall
mission
o Work with sponsors
and users

• Mission reqs. and • Mission goals
constraints
• Project policies
o Budgets
o Allocated
o Ops concept
budgets
o Ops component
o Status reports
status reports
to sponsors

o

o

Payload data
volume?
Data products?
SensltIvItytolost
data?
Error free vs;
nonerrorfree
data?
System
optimization
criteria?
Peervs.
hierarchical
system
engineering?
Test poRcles?
Distnbuted VS.
centrallzed
PC'svs.
workstations or
mainframes
Dedicated dey.
staffing?
Otherdev.
resources?
Training
tools/aids?
Operator cert.
porJcles?
Keep or
delegate
technical
decisions?
Approval
poncles

These 13 operations functions in are useful for collecting and organizing requireon <?perations and to break out work for estimating, bookkeeping, and compar109 operatIOns costs. You can design an operations system by defIning the interfaces
~twee? .these 13 functions-specifying the flow of data products, interface formats,
time-cntical processes, and hardware and software tools. A thorough understanding of
ea.ch.function i~ important for efficient design, estimating costs, and managing space
ITIISSIOn operations.
~ents

1. Mission Planning

Mission planning starts before activity planning. It defines how to use resources

~t in accom~li~hing mission goals. Mission planning produces rough activity timelm~ .a~oss ml~lon phases that identify the schedule and resources to complete major

actiVities. The mterface between mission planning and activity planning can be as general as operations based activity guidelines or as specific as a detailed timeline of
activity requests that later gets converted into commands.
Resources that mission planners and designers are concerned with include the
trajectory or orbit design, consumables over the spacecraft's lifetime, and long-range

14.2

Overview ofSpace Mission Operations Functions

603

facility support. This task can be relatively easy for missions with low activity levels,
simple trajectories, and reasonable margins for spacecraft consumables.It's also easy
for supporting facilities with high availability that we can schedule far in advance.
Mission planning can be very complex for missions that have oversubscribed timelines, a complex trajectory, tight budgets for spacecraft consumables, and over-used,
shared resources. Timelines become oversubscribed whenever requests for engineering and payload activities overwhelm the time for the spacecraft to do them. Examples
of complex trajectory design include planetary gravitational assists, rendezvous and
docking, formation flying and planetary landers. Consumables that may have tight
margins-requiring mission planning to allocate and manage budgets-include power
(battery charge-discharge cycles), propellant, cryogen, total radiation dose, and cycles
of mechanical devices, such as number of thruster firings, valve openings, and slewing
of a scan platform. Examples of shared resource facilities that may be overbooked and
complicate mission planning include the Deep Space Network's 70 m antennas and
wide-band links on TDRSS. Complexity and costs for mission planning grow geometrically, rather than linearly, as each factor increases in complexity because tbeir
intemctions increase.
Contingency planning is another task assigned to Mission Planning. We usually
add contingency reserves to consumable budgets and desIgn busy timelines to include
a few planned, low-activity periods that are available for unplanned, contingency
activities. Some missions demonstrate cost effectiveness by scheduling "bonus"
payload activities they can drop·to respond to contingencies, but which get executed
if everything goes as planned. The most common form of operations contingencies we
plan for are spacecraft or payload anomalies, degraded performance, and changes to
facility schedules. Contingency planning for more adaptive missions sometimes
include responding quickly to surprise opportunities or changing conditions.
2. Activity Planning and Development
This operations function produces the spacecraft's stored sequences discussed
above. Activity planning converts requests for spacecraft and payload activities into a
file of timed commands for uplink to the spacecraft. This command fjle is a sequence
of commands that are integrated, time-ordered, constraint-checked, simulated, validated, reviewed, approved, and defect-free. Activity planning often generates real-time
commands that may require simulation or constraint checking before passing them to
Mission Control for uplinking.
Three factors influence the difficulty and cost of activity planning: complexity of
the process for integrating requests, required accuracy of the constraint checking and
performance models used to simulate and validate the activity plans, and duration for
which the activity plan is to be active.
Missions with simple activity inputs and integration processes usually have a small
number of users. They use an efficient format for activity requests, often electronic,
with requests written by users in the command language. In addition, their mission
resources are under-subscribed, so most requests can be scheduled and executed with
few conflicts between requests. Examples of constrained mission resources that can
complicate how we integrate the activity plan include limited onboard sequencing
memory, limited time to carry out activities, limited power, limited onboard data storage or downlink bit rate, and limited tracking resources or downlink time. Missi ons
that must develop highly constrained activity plans sometimes reduce costs by preallocating resources and then pushing conflict-resolution tasks back on the requesting
teams from Mission Design, Spacecraft Engineering, Payload, or Operations.

604

Mission Operations

14.2

Accuracy in spacecraft-perfonnance models can also drive activity planning. For
example, suppose we need to plan a spa~-pointing maneuver to move a sensor's
bo~lght from .~get A to target B, usmg pre-p!anned, timed commands. This plan
req~ a pred!ctive model of slew rates, turn times, and settling times. Models for
propulsIOn, attitude control, thermal, power, and telecom can all require frequent
tuning and calibration. That means designing and doing flight tests, as well as
~easuring ~d do~g a spacecrat:t's performance parameters and then compar_
Ing them With prediCtions. After analYSIS, we would update the models. This process
can consume a lot of operations resources, not just in activity planning but also in data
collection and analysis. Missions ~th. performance margins can use lower fidelity
models and save money. But some mISSions, such as a planetary flyby spend hundreds
of milli?ns ~f ~o~:us to do a few ~ours of an activity plan for closest approach. They
want to optimize spacecraft and Instrument performance, so they're willing to invest
in high-fidelity, accurately calibrated performance models.
Selecting the duration of a stored activity plan is a.third factor that can significantly
influence activity planning costs. Activity plans that last only a few hours require frequent uplinks,. extra station coverage, '?l~ around-the-clock staffing. Short activity
plan~ can be timed to correspond to mISSion events (such as orbit duration), don't
reqUIre large memory storage on board, can respond to last-minute requests from
users, and often can adapt to activity-request conflicts in the current sequence under
development by postponing the activity to the next one. Activity plans designed to last
~or weeks or even months may require more onboard sequencing memory and more
time for uplink transmissions. With longer activity plans, requesters must think over
much longer planning epochs and, if an activity doesn't get scheduled in the current
plan, it must wait until the next one. Requesters who miss getting commands integrated into lengthy activity plans often resort to real time commands, bypassing the
stored sequence process and increasing the load on Mission Control. Missions that
opera~e in this mode usually enj~y the advantage of being able to staff activity
planmng 5 days per week, pnme shift only. We can reduce staffing by decreasing the
number of activity plans and making each one last longer.

3. Mission Control
Mission Control handles activities that must be done in real or near real time. They
do last-minute adjustments to pre-scheduled mission timelines. They manage the
ground system's configuration and coordinate interface with operations facilities such
as trackin~ stati~ns and c?mmunication services. They also manage the spacecraft's
configuration USIng real-time commands and telemetry monitoring. Mission controllers det~t a spacecraft's telemetry alarms and anomalies, isolate problems, and call in
a~r?pna~e ~xperts on the spacecraft or ground system. They maintain a log of
nusslOn-slgmficant events. They often work whenever the spacecraft is being tracked,
so controllers may have to take other than prime shifts.
. ~ssion control tasks may require significant staffing and high activity levels for
nusslOns that do many activities in near real time. This operations style is called joystick operations. It's often characteristic of missions that have short communication
delays, continuous or nearly continuous coverage, and less elaborate software for
onbo~ autono~y: These missions require rapid ground reaction to unplanned events.
Joysti~k style .mIsslOns must be able to tolerate occasional wrong commands or other
operational nustakes common when people must respond rapidly.
Mission Control staffing is lower for missions that de-emphasize real-time decisions by ground operations. Instead, these missions rely on the ability to pre-plan

_._-------

-

- - - - -

14.2

Overview of Space Mission Operations Functions

605

activities and load the spacecraft with a timed command sequence that has a high
probability of executing successfully with minimum ground interaction. What this
stored-sequence style saves in real-time mission control, it usually more than pays for
through increased costs for design and simulation tools. Missions often use it if they
have long two-way light times, long periods without tracking or ground contact, and
at least a modest investment in software for onboard autonomy. This software allows
the spacecraft to react to unplanned events. Missions using stored sequences can't
tolerate errors in critical events such as a planetary flyby or injection maneuver. Thus
they rely on elaborate planning, simulation, and review to produce and store
zero-defect plans. Software now handles most reflexive actions, such as monitoring
and responding to faults in real time.

4. Data Delivery (see Data Services in Function 8)
5. Navigation and Orbit Control
This operations function delivers the flight system to the target or maintains an
operational orbit It designs trajectories to meet various requirements and constraints.
Efficient designs for trajectories or orbits can save a lot in launch-vehicle costs and the
spacecraft's required propellant mass. As described in detail in Chapter 7, techniques
such as planetary gravity assists, aerobraking, and electric propulsion are some of the
methods navigation uses to achieve efficiency goals.
As discussed in Section 11.7, navigation detennines the flight system's location
and velocity by using several types of data. Radiometric data collected during telemetry and command passes may include one- and two-way Doppler, as well as ranging
codes. Some planetary spacecraft with imaging instruments use images of planets or
asteroids and the star field background to give very precise spacecraft location data.
Some Earth-orbiting spacecraft use onboard GPS receivers to locate the spacecraft.
Navigation analyzes this position data to detennine trajectory or orbit corrections
needed to meet mission requirements. They also furnish position data to teams in Payload Operations who use it to interpret or calibrate instrument measurements. They
also send trajectory and orbit data to Data Services, so these teams know when to
schedule antenna tracks and where to point them.
Once the actual trajectory has been detennined, orbit control function defines propulsive maneuvers needed for correction. Orbit control and Spacecraft Operations
work together closely on this process, particularly the attitude-control and propulsion
analysts. Desired changes to the spacecraft's velocity vector get converted to turns and
propulsion bum times and then into spacecraft commands. Designing and analyzing a
trajectory correction maneuver can get complicated. We may need to model the thrusters' performance, analyze gravitational effects and disturbance forces, and complete
noIninal and "clean-up" maneuver designs.
6. Spacecraft Operations
This spacecraft engineering function oversees the spacecraft's health and safety in
flight and calibrates and maintains equipment to keep the spacecraft's performance
within specifications. Engineers define detailed operational configurations and states
necessary to support payload activities, such as modes for pointing, power, and data
service. They also maintain flight software and analyze spacecraft failures.
Spacecraft Operations provides Mission Planning with requirements for calibrating
and maintaining equipment to be integrated into mission activity plans. They also provide mission planners actual resource consumption data together with performance
models to help them plan and manage mission resources.

606

Mission Operations

14,2

Spacecraft Operations sends requests to Activity Planning for engineering activities
to be converted into timed commands in an integrated sequence. They often review
activity plans before uplinking to make sure they don't violate flight rules from spacecraft engineering and that they meet operational peculiarities and constraints of the
subsystems. Reviews cail be simple for missions that execute a routine daily set of
standard commands and for missions that have invested in simulation software which
automatically checks constraints. But they can be time consuming for missions that
have a high percentage of new or unique activities every day, that can't simulate activities and constraints, and that have subsystems which strongly constrain operations.
Spacecraft Operations delegates to Mission Control the responsibility for real-time
monitoring of the spacecraft's health and performance (such as monitoring telemetry
alarm limits). This delegation allows Spacecraft Engineering to concentrate on more
deliberative, non-real-time tasks, such as analyzing performance and predicting longterm trends. It also often allows them to staff only 8 hours per day, 5 days per week.
There are two styles of fault detection and anomaly analysis. The first-a detectrespond style-is less expensive. Operators watch for alarms or other unexpected
failures, analyze them, and prepare strategies to correct or work them. The second-a
predict-prevent style-<:osts more. Planners predict trends and performance, trying to
forecast faults before they might occur and then plan preventative action. This task can
involve elaborate models for telemetry, power, thermal, dynamics, and other systems
and can require significant calibrations and performance tests during a flight. Detectrespond fault operations are characteristic of space missions that can handle occasional
unplanned down times to recover from faults. Often these missions have single-string
hardware configurations with limited options for recovering from failures. Predict-prevent fault operations are characteristic of space missions with engineering or science
events, for which an unplanned down time could cause loss of a mission or loss of mission critical science data that We can't recover. Often these missions have block redundant hardware, allowing operators to select a back-up component when trending data
suggests a possible future failure in the main on-line, component.
Failure analysis sometimes requires using test beds on the ground that allow
analysts to simulate or recreate problems observed in flight. Spacecraft Operations
nnis and maintains them, which can become a significant operations cost for test-bed
hardware (usually, engineering models for flight hardware) and managing and updating software.
Spacecraft Operations also maintains and fixes flight software, then continues to
de~elop it after launch. Missions with long flight times, changing mission goals, or
major anomaly recovery work-arounds will often require significant software re-development during flight. Some missions that have long flights to targets may even
deliberately postpone developing target-related software until after launch. Software
test and validation becomes another use for the flight-system testbed and another
potential expense for Spacecraft Operations.
7. Payload Operations
This operations function has similar interfaces as the Spacecraft Operations function, but with responsibility for the payload instead of the spacecraft. Payload operators send measurement goals and activity requests to Mission Planning and Activity
Planning respectively, which convert payload requests into mission timelines and
integrated command loads. Some designs for mission operations try to simplify these
interfaces by allowing payload controllers to directly command the payload's configuration and method of returning data, sometimes from sites located remotely from the

14.2

Overview of Space Mission Operations Functions

Mission Operations Center. This approach works best when individual payload instruments and sensors don't interact and when instruments don't contend much for
spacecraft resources, such as power, pointing, data storage, and downlink bandwidth.
Payload operations use different data types. Operators monitor the payload
engineering data to check the status of its health and safety. ~en, ~s~ion Con,!,>l
handles this task. Operators analyze data from the payload to verify that It IS producmg
results in ranges of expected values. This is known as quick-look analysis. It doesn't
replace the interpretation that becomes part of longer-term scientific discovery. Quicklook analysis happens quickly, so operators can discover and correct anomalies for
instruments, sensors, and sequencing before they have collected, calibrated, and
archived a lot of data. Quick-look analysis often requires concurrent recovery and
analysis of a payload's ancillary data (such as where the spacecraft was located-orbit
data), which direction it was pointed (attitude or scan-platform data), engineering
states of instruments (gain settings or filter selections), and sometimes relevant envi- .
ronmentaI measurements (radiation field and temperature).
Complexity of instruments and investigations directly influence the size of the
Payload Operations task. Instruments cost more to operate if they have many control
states, are sensitive to interactions with other instruments or the background environment, must manage their own consumables (batteries or cryogen), and face many
operational constraints (such as avoiding the Sun or Earth, warm up, cool down, radiatorfield of view). Investigations with complex targets, payload tasks (such as ground
rovers or space weapons) and activity timelines cost more to operate. Some missions
are designed to use correlative data from other sources (such as multiple spacecraft) or
multiple sensors (such as measurements from ocean buoys). These missions may need
more effort to plan operations and analyze data.
8. Data Services (Includes: (4) Data Delivery, (8) Payload Data Processing and
(9) Archiving and Maintaining the Mission Database)
This function does various Data Service tasks including tracking and acquiring
data, transmitting commands, transporting data, handling local computer and commu-

nication services, processing and displaying data, simulating data flow, maintaining
the Inission's database, building data products, and archiving data. IT also plans and·
analyzes performance, and coordinates operation of the ground data system. It supports all other operations functions. Well designed, well run data services can be vital
to how efficiently other operations functions do their tasks. If a mission must return a
lot of mission data, data services can dominate operations costs. New technologies,
such as CD-ROMs and the worldwide web, have greatly reduced the cost of historical
data products such as photographs and magnetic tape libraries.
Well engineered data systems apply existing data standards so we can use standard
data services and tools. Handbooks from the Consultative Committee for Space Data
Standards document standards for space data. International teams develop these
handbooks with U.S. representation from DoD, NASA, and industry. The standards
separate into layers for data timing, synchronization, transport, coding and representation. The direction has been away from data-stream services, such as the older systems
using time-division multiplexed telelDetry, and toward packet-based or file-based pr0tocols that permit standard services independent of content.
Operations can be very efficient with well engineered data designs_ These designs
consider capabilities for ground processing and archiving while planning for onboard
data capture, processing, and packaging. On the other hand, operating a poorly

,
!I

608

Mission Operations

14.2

engineered data system can be costly. Such designs require operators to recOVer
extract, and correlate various separated data types. Other cost drivers include th~
robustness of payload data processing to data loss or drop~ut and the project's policies on what percentage of data must be recovered for mission success. Many anecdotes describe missions that used 90% of their resources trying to recover the last few
percent of data.
Operations design must choose between two competing approaches to data
systems: multi-mission vs. mission-unique. Advocates of multi-mission data systems
emphasize the efficiency of using a common design and a common set of operators to
provide data services to more than one mission. We can amortize costs for parts of a
ground data system that require large capitol investments, and this makes it more
affordable. This approach also helps us use data standards and reuse systems. Costsharing efficiencies free up money to invest in data systems and to pay for overhead
costs such as maintenance, planned upgrades, and new technologies. However,
detractors point out that multi-mission, generic systems and organizations may be less
efficient than those designed for, and focused on, a specific project's needs. Large
heritage systems with significant capitol investments are expensive to change and
can't respond to new technology innovations as rapidly as smaller, unique systems.
Usually, we decide on generic or unique data services for individual elements. Consider, for example, capturing telemetry data from deep space. This requires a network
of large, expensive antennas-too expensive to build for each project But calibrating
payload data might require unique project software and processes, as well as operators
dedicated to each project. Recent development of commercial off-the-shelf software
that handles things like orbit analysis, command management, telemetry decommutation and display, and simulation has allowed us to take a cost-effective hybrid
approach. These tools have made it easier to tailor commercial, multi-mission tools for
unique data services.
Shared, multi-mission data services can present a problem when they are oversubscribed. Competition with other users can sometimes lead to complex scheduling that
uses up a project's resources and complicates mission planning. Late schedule changes
responding to other users' emergencies can require major replanning. Over-subscription can become significant whenever institutions fund multi-mission data services
and provide them "free" to users. To help reduce this problem, NASA is startingjUllcost accounting: it will allocate costs of multi-mission institutional services to individual users. The move to data-system architectures on workstations and personal
computers also helps relieve over-subscription. Hardware dedicated to a project can
host multi-mission software, and operators for that project can run it.
10. System Engineering and Integration and Test

This task considers the operations system as a whole, managing interfaces and
adjudicating competing desires and requirements between operational teams, tasks,
and functional elements. For example, activity planning is easier if Mission Planning
produces a conflict-free timeline. Mission planning is easier if they only provide
schedule requests and conflict-resolution guidelines to Activity Planning. System
Engineering resolves issues like these to get the best performance from the system.
They also define criteria for a best system, such as low cost, high reliability, minimum
staffing, quick response, or all of these and more.
Just as System Engineering defmes and manages interfaces between elements of a
mission's internal operations. it does the same for elements of external operations.
such as providers of institutional services or correlative data for a payload. System

14.2

Overview of Space Mission Operations Functions

engineers focus on technical-interface agreements. such as data formats, procedures,
and protocols. Management focuses on program interfaces such as funding agreements. System engineers develop and maintain operations concepts to help desigil and
refine system architecture, team responsibilities, and operations interfaces. Operations
concepts include scenarios, timelines, and product flows that capture the operations
system performance requirements, design constraints, and requirements derived from
the design.
System Engineering also plans for contingencies, resolves anomalies, and handles
failure recoveries. System engineers coordinate anomaly analysis that involves interaction among several engineers or teams and provide technical approval of engineering change requests to develop fault repairs or work-arounds.
During operations, the Integration and Test task supports development by testing
new or redelivered capabilities. It also supports testing of system interfaces when new
institutional capabilities get delivered. Teams must develop test schedules to fit
operational schedules. Engineers have to save previous versions of software to permit
return to a known good system whenever testing shows the new version has problems.
Independent verification and validation, i.e. assigning the Integration and Test task to
engineers different from those in Development is a common practice to ensure independent, objective testing.
11. Computers and Communications Support

This function entails designing and buying or building hardware for the end-to-end
information system. Because space missions typically produce so much data in electronic form, mission operations planners must ensure data moves efficiently. To do so,
we prepare data-flow diagraiDS, requirements for computers or workstations,
requirements for networking and data communication (within the control center and
around the world), and requirements for voice communications. Having accurate dataflow diagrams (see Sec. 2.2.1) is the starting point for designing the hardware. From
mission objectives, we learn how much data must flow, between which nodes, and
how frequently. We use this information to diagram the data flow and allocate datahandling processes to software and hardware. From the diagrams, we list the numbers
and types of computers, workstations, and other hardware. Knowing the communications architecture and organizational design helps us choose the hardware correctly.
For example, a decentralized organization for mission operations requires us to
connect dispersed staff members, which usually means preparing a communications
network.
The networking requirements also come from the data-flow diagrams and Usually
require more support equipment. Other networking factors are availability, capacity,
and security for mission data.The final piece of communication support is the voice
and video-teleconferencing requirements. Early in design, we must establish any need
for these special linkS so the operations organization can communicate efficiently during the mission.
Because of the proliferation of modem computing and communication equipment,
planning for their support may be no more complex than ordering from industry
catalogs. Designing and building unique hardware usually isn't cost effective, but special requirements may drive us to do trade-offs in this area. Finally, maintaining and
admini~ng the computer and communication hardware throughout the mission is a
vital concern. Good designs allow us to repair and replace equipment and allocate staff
for this activity.

610

Mission Operations

14.2

12. Development, Maintenance and Training

Throughout a project's life cycle, we must develop and maintain software for:
• Creating normal space and ground system operations before launch
• Correcting spacecraft and ground system errors after launch
• Implementing changes in mission requirements after launch
One modem

trend for interplanetary missions is developing operations software

~r launch. We program basic functions before launch, but create most of the opera_

i
I'

tions software during the long cruise phase, then upload it in time for the planetary
encounter. ~imilarly, some ~mmercial co~unications constellations have been able
to substantially shorten thea deployment time by completing the onboard software
subsequent to launch of the initial phase.
. Another reaso~ that flight software gets developed after launch is to deal with infl!ght hardware failures. An example of an in-flight failure is the Galileo spacecraft's
high-~ain antenna. ~ launch it failed to deploy. So, progralnmers had to redesign
the flight software dunng the transfer phase to provide data formats and enhanced
onboard coding for the low-gain antenna to complete the mission.
To develop and maintain software for any mission, we need to know
• System requirements--use existing software from previous missions or devel-

op new software for new requirements
• Error reports--error reports drive software maintenance
• Change requests-system capability changes usually require software changes
• As-?uilt documentation-knowing the current software as "built" (not as
desIgned), helps us develop and maintain it more effectively.
Several techniques for developing and maintaining software improve our probability of having software that works:

14.3

Estimating the Size and Cost of Mission Operations

611

13. Management

Operations Management has overall responsibility for operations success. Managers must meet operations requirements within negotiated values for cost, schedule, and
system perfoimance. They provide the resources to make the other operations
functions work. They focus on planning, monitoring, directing, and reporting of pr0grammatic resources such as costs, schedules, and staffing.
Managers work with the sponsors and customers and negotiate mission goals vs.
resources. They define the mission's operational policies and guidelines. An effective
management technique is to allocate resources to each operations function or team and
then not get involved in technical decisions or approvals unless they exceed the resources allocated. If management retains technical authority, managers also participate in and approve technical operations decisions. For any project, we have to think
through how much we want management to participate in the daily approval of operations products in terms of operations response time, efficiency, team motivation, and
value added. This operations element usually carries the budget for operational reserves and funding for other tasks, such as administrative support.

14.3 Estimating the Size and Cost of Mission Operations
How do you estimate the size of the operations task for a given mission? To some
extent the size is influenced by the operations design itself which includes considerations such as the efficiency of how the teams are organized, how tasks are assigned,
team member experience, how team members are trained and certified. and bow the
team is motivated and managed. But operations design efficiency typically can
influence team size by only 10 to 20%. It does not explain why some missions can fly
with only a few people, whereas others require an operations team of several hundred.

• Know.the requirements and ensure they are testable and agree with the mission
operations concept
• Use rapid prototyping to demonstrate system capabilities early
• Deliver the ground data system in increments
• Plan to develop and maintain software during operations (don't send the software design team home too early)
• Match software schedules to hardware schedules, so integration and testing
aren't delayed
• Thoroughly test the software, usually incrementally
• Keep operations informed of software status so operators are ready when it is
• Use the new software in training, so operators know its capabilities and trust it
• Plan further software maintenance after delivery
~imilar to computer hardware, software development and maintenance change
rap~d1y. The software package that was unique on one mission may be commercially
avad~ble for t!te nex~ New, highly flexible designs spring from unusual places, such

as MlcrosateIIite desIgns and large constellations. Communicating what's available
and what will work is a demanding process.

Fig. 14-2. Four Factors that Drive the Cost of Mission OperaUons.

Decisions made in designing missions, payloads and spacecraft, communication
and ground systems, and policies on operational risk all affect operations cost and size.
Operations often become expensive when we make these design decisions first, without considering how they affect operations. Instead, we should develop the operations
concept concurrently with other elements, so we can select the best overall approach

Mission Operations

612

14.3

14.3

Estimating the Size and Cost of Mission Operations

613

based on affordability and lifecycle cost This section identifies important drivers of
operations costs and organizes them into 4 factors you can use to estimate the size and
cost of space mission operations. Figure 14-2 shows these 4 factors and their effect on
an operations team's size and cost as operations complexity increases or decreases.

TABLE 14-6. How Design Factors for Communications and Ground Systems Affect Operational Complexity (Chaps. 13, 15, and 16).

TABLE 14-4. How Mission Design Factors Affect Operational Complexity (Chaps. 1-8).

,. ti
Commumca on

o

system Design

"0

ops...

Simple, Low-cost
(10 People or less)

Mission
Objectives

Complex, High-cost Ops
.......--~....~ (SO People or more)

• Well defined
• Single goal
• Constant
o Few mission phases
o Single spacecraft
o Loose tlmelines
o Low activity level
o Repetitive activities
o Repetitive opportunities

MIssion
Concept

• Ambiguous
• Multiple competing goals
o Changes with time and data
o
o
o
o
o
o

OrbffITrajectory o Stable trajectory dynamics
Design
• Comfortable I!N margin

Space
Environment

.....

Simple, Low-cost Ops ...
..... Complex, High-cost Ops
(10 People or less) : . . . . . - -...p... (50 People or more)

• Few nav data types
• Loose accuracy reqs for nav.
control and reconstruction
• Known environment
• Stable environment

• New space environment
• Rapidly changing environment

o

Near continuous tracking required

o

Telemetry, command, and
radiometric tracking reqs
compete

Dedicated or undersubscribed
tracking resource

• Shared, oversubscribed tracking
resource

o

Low data volume

o

o

High com link margins

o

Low com link margins

o

Loose coupling between onboard
and ground events

o

Tight coupling between onboard
and ground events

o

No station reconflguratlon during

• Frequent station reconflguratlon
during pass

o

Many mission phases
Constallatlon
Tight tlmelines
High activity level
Many one-tlme-only activities
One-tlme-only opportunities

• Rapidly changing trajectory dynamics
• Tight I!N consumables budget
• Many nav; data types
o Tight accuracy reqs for nav. control
and reconstruction

Infrequent tracking required
Telemetry, command, and
radiometric tracking reqs are
compatible

pass

Ground System
Design

TABLE 14-5. How Design Faelors for the Payload and Spacecraft Affect Operational
Complexity (Chaps. ~12).

o

Highly repetitive tracking
schedule

o

Many uniquely scheduled tracks

o

Dedicated or undersubscribed
ground systam

o

Multimission, shared,
oversubscribed, ground system

o

Stable ground system and
software design post-launch

o

o

Prime shift only ops team staffing

Frequently changed ground
system and software design after
launch

o

Project specialists, multi-tasked

o

o

Minimum number of operator
tasks for data capture and alarm
monitoring

24-hour-per-day ops steam
staffing

o

Task specialists, multi-project

o

Many operator tasks for data
capture and alarm monitoring

Simple, Low-cost Ops
Complex, High-cost Ops
(10 People or less) ..........._~... (50 People or more)

Payload
Design

0"

• Single sensorlinstrument
Independent sensor data
• Simple calibration
o Low rata data output
o Mature technology
• Small amount of software
o Simple pointing
o Instrument dedicated resources
(power, pointing, data storage)
o Few payload modes
• Few data formats
• Simple data processing
Spacecraft o Single string
DesIgn
o Mature technology
o Comfortable margins (power,
memory, thermal)
o Spinner or gravity-gradient
• Few night rules and constraints
• Few onboard engineering measurement routinely downUnked
• Few telemetry rates and formats
• Few articulating devices
o

• Many sensorslinstruments
• Correlative data dependency
• Complex calibration
o High rate data output
o New technology
o Large amount of software
o Complex targeted pointing
o Instruments compete for shared resources
o Many payload modes
o Many data formats
o Complex data processing, compression,
and editing options
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

Block redundant
New technology
Low or negative margins
3-axis stabilized
Many flight rules and constraints
Many onboard engineering measurements
routinely downlinked
Many telemetry rates and formats
Many articulating devices

High data volume

Ops tasks done in single control
center

• Operations tasks distributed
across many locations

TABLE 14-7. How Operational Risk Policies Affect Operational Complexity.
Simple, Low-cost OPS"'~._ _-litnr.~Complex, High-cost Ops
(10 People or less)
.... (SO People or more)

Operational Risk
Policies

o

Low investment in spacecraft and
payload development

o

High investment in spacecraft and
payload development

o

Few mission critical events

o

Many mission critical events

o

Spacecraft can safe itself without
ground action

o

Spacecraft depends on ground to
respond to anomaly

o

Performance analysis limited to
fault detection

o

Performance analysis includes
trending and fault prevention

o

Command activity plans require
simple simulation and constraint
checking

o

Command activity plans require
elaborata simulation and
constraint checking

o

High tolerance for "lost" payload
or engineering data

o

Low tolerance for "lost" payload or
engineering data

,
1

614

Mission Operations

14.3

• Mission design involves defining mission objectives, developing a mission
concept, designing orbits and trajectories, and evaluating the space environ_
ment Chapters 1 through 8 cover these design processes in detail. Table 14-4
shows how these design decisions affect operational complexity and the
operations team's size.
• Payload and spacecraft design, is covered in Chaps. 9 through 12. It involves
design choices that affect the flight system's operability. Table 14-5 shows
how these design choices affect operational complexity.
• Design of communications, operations and ground systems is covered in
Chaps. 13 to 16. It involves design and implementation choices that influence
wh~t tools and communication resources the operations team uses to support
theIr tasks. Table 14-6 shows how design decisions here affect operational
complexity.
• Policies on operational risk all effect cost and complexity. The more dollars
and time we spend in developing a mission, the less operational risk we're usually willing to take. Operationally complex spacecraft require more cautious
operations. Table 14-7 shows how these policies affect operations
complexity.
After reviewing operations cost data for many government, commercial and
scientific missions, we have found that operations costs can be predicted reaso~ably
accurately as ~ percentage of the total development cost of the spacecraft (i.e., payload
plus bus). This makes sense because spacecraft that must perform complex missions
and operate in severe environments tend to have higher development and operations
C?sts while spacecraft with simpler missions and which operate in less severe en~~ents tend to have low~r development and operations cost Organizations are
willing to accept more operational risks (e.g. lower ops costs) for low cost spacecraft,
while organizations that have a significant investment in an expensive spacecraft or
payload. usually insist on more risk averse, higher cost operations. Table 14-8 shows
an experienced-based model of this relationship between first unit spacecraft plus
payload total development cost and first year ops costs.
TABLE 14-8. Estimating Mission Operations Cost per Year. Arst estimate the theoretical first
unit cost from Chap. 20 and determine the category of spacecraft. Using the
percentages in the second column estimate the low, high, and average mission
operations costs per year. A more detaDed ops cost model is avatlable on-Une from
the Johnson Space Center homa page, http://www.jsc.nasa.gov/bu21SOCMl
SOCM.html

Spacecraft plus Payload
TheoreUcai First UnH

% of TheoreUcal
First UnH Cost Per
Year for Mission Ops

EsUmated Mission Operational
Cost per Year for FlreSat
($M FY99)

Traditional> $5M (FY99)

1 5 (average 3)

0.9-4.3 (average 2.7)

Low Cost < $5M (FY99)

3-12 (average 8)

Cost Category

In order to refine the estimate obtained from Table 14-8, you can assess overall
complexity of the mission systems using Tables 14-4 through 14-7. If your assessment
results in a more complex mission, a higher percentage should be used from the second
column of Table 14-8. A lower percentage would be used for a less complex mission.

615

Estimating the S*JZe and Cost of Mission Operations

14.3

One of the most important operational issues is whether support is required around
the clock or only 40 hours per week. If the mission is designed with this in mind such
that continuous operational support is not required. then personnel costs can be
reduced by a factor of 4 or more. If continuous support is required to meet specific
mission needs. we must then determine whether 4 or 5 operations teams are needed.
based on the assessment in Table 14-9. Fmally, we multiply the number of teams times
the number of people per team to get the total operations personnel for the mission.
This should be done separately for each of the major mission phases, since some
phases may be much more operations intensive than others.
TABLE 14-9. Operations Concept Using Four and five Teams. Typically we arrive at a staffing solution employing between four and five tearns, giving duties besides spacecraft operations to the fifth team.

Standard

Number of
Teams

hrlyrJleam

Required
hrlyrJleam

Management
Concem

4

2,000

2,190

190 hr/yr/team
Overtima Wages

HIghly sensitive to persoMel
absence and turnover

5

2,000

1,752

248 hr/yr/team
Available Labor

Increased number of people to
train and manage

Result

TABLE 14-10. Relative Cost of Mission Operations Functions. The cost of each function Is
given as a percentage of the average annual operations cost forthet mission. Data
is from CSP AssocIates [1999]. Note that the functional breakdown differs sRghtIy
from that of Ag. 14-1 due to the categories in which data was coOected In the CSP
study.

Annual Operations

Development
Function
1. Management

Low

Typical

High

Low

Typical

High

(%)

(0/0)

(%)

(Ok)

(%)

(%)

14

70

194

0

8

22

2. Mission planning

0

78

169

0

4

12

3. Command Management

0

96

334

1

3

7

4. Mission control

4

146

410

9

22

45

5. Data capture

37

62

86

0

6

10

6. Navigation

8

78

212

3

9

26

7. Spacecraft planning and analysis

8

63

162

0

3

7

8. ScIence planning and analysis

0

87

662

0

17

72

9. ScIence data processing

0

181

480

0

17

42

10. Data archive

0

18

59

0

7

18

20

197

437

0

3

17

12. Computers and communications

0

7

25

0

1

e

TOTALS

90

1,085

3,230

13

100

284

11. Systems engineering, integration, & test

Mission Operations

616

14.4

Other, more elaborate cost models have been developed to predict operations costs.
One model, based on estimating the value ranges of 91 operations complexity factors
that correspond closely to the factors in tables 14-4 through 14-7, successfully pre.
dicted ops costs to within 25% for 13 out of 14 scientific mission case studies
[Carraway, 1994, 1996]. NASA has also recently developed a Space Operations Cost
Model that has operations cost estimation modules for planetary and Earth orbiter
missions, orbiting space facilities, launch system ops, and human spaceflight (lunarl
Mars) mission operations.

14.4 Automating Spacecraft and Ground Operations Functions*
As discussed in Sees. 2.1.2,11.7 and Chap. 23, continuing technology advances in
spacecraft computing and memory capacity, together with improved software capabil.
ities, are now making it possible to do things on board the spacecraft that people on
the ground have done. Some examples are
• Monitoring alarms
• Managing spacecraft resources
• Analyzing performance and trends
• Onboard navigation and orbit control
• Adaptively planning activities
• Processing payload data
• Detecting faults-sating the vehicle-recovering from failures
• Adaptively capturing and downlinking data
• Constraint checking commands
• Mining data
• Archiving data
Migrating these functions from the ground to the spacecraft can save a lot of money
by reducing ground operations tasks and the need for continuous staffing and fast
response from the operations team. It can reduce the amount of routine data we must
transmit over expensive space communication links, process on the ground, and
analyze. Processes performed on the spacecraft can use timely data, free from delays
in space communication links and uncorrupted by transmission errors.
It's helpful to distinguish four levels of autonomy. The first level of autonomy is
onboard closed-loop processes. Examples might be closed-loop thermal control,
momentum management, attitude control, and even navigation and orbit control. The
second level of autonomy is the ability of a spacecraft to execute planned events with·
out human intervention via a stored onboard sequence of timed commands. At the
• This section discusses general characteristics of autonomy, not necessarily related to reducing
mission cost. Sec. 2.1.2 discusses the use of autonomy to reduce cost. Sec. 11.7 discusses the
specific example of autonomous navigation and orbit control as a means of reducing both cost
and risk. Finally, Sec. 23.3 discusses implementing the concept of "autonomy in moderation"
for general spacecraft fimctions to reduce cost and risk.

14.4

Automating Spacecraft and Ground Operations Functions

617

third level of autonomy, the spacecraft can react to unplanned events through eventdriven rules. At the fourth level ~f autonomy, spa~ rea~ to unI?lanned even~ not
.ust by executing rules but by usmg forms of onboard mtelligence, inference engines,
Jand plannmg
. agents.
Most spacecraft have level 1 autonomy and exploit onboard control loops. M~st
pacecraft have level 2 autonomy and can execute pre-planned sequences by usmg
:une-tagged commands referenced to their own clocks. Many spacecraft have l.evel
three autonomy in that they can sense and respond to unplanned hardware failure
events by executing fault response rules that switch them to safe modes or that autonomously reconfigure the spacecraft to ~ackup, redundant hardware components: ~ome
spacecraft go beyond just hardware fatlure event response and have the capabIli~ to
xecute rule-based responses to payload-sensor events as well. Spacecraft are testing
~ut level 4 autonomy by flying software that will perform autonomo~ on~
adaptive planning and resource management Deep Space 1 has onboard mtelligent
agent software and Europa Orbiter will fly an adaptive, prioritized goal achieving execution engine.
Autonomy can enhance mission capabilities but it may not always reduce operational costs. Onboard control loops can require extra operations attention to the
performance of flight software and management of flight computer resources. The creation of sequences or activity plans may require many people on the ground to plan,
model, implement, constraint .check, simulate, approve, uplink, and enab~e. If so,
they'll end up being more expensive than a set of commands a smaIl operall~ns staff
uplinks in joystick mode in real time. Fault protection rules onboard c~ reqUIre large
teams to design and to then analyze the causes and results when they trtgger. The cost
of programming, ''training'', perfo~ce moniton,ng, an~ lI?uble shooting an intelligent agent can easily be underestimated. For a given mISSIOn, we can evaluate the
costlbenefits of each of the four levels of autonomy in terms of several specific operational cost savings by answering the following questions.
Does it reduce the number or complexity of tasks that must be performed by ground
operators? If the net number or complexity of tasks perfo~ed by operations g~s
down (after considering the additional operational tasks required to program, mamtain, analyze, and trouble shoot the autonomy), then spacecraft autonomy can be
justified in terms of ops cost savings.
Does it allow an increase in the time between spacecraft contacts? How long a
spacecraft can go routinely unattended can depend heavil~ on the.amount of on~oa:d
autonomy. The longer a spacecraft can go without ground mteracllon the more sIgmficant staffing cost savings may be by enabling single-shift rather than around the clock
operations. The plan for the Pluto Express spacecraft during its nine year cruise to
Pluto, is to have lights out operations (i.e., no activity) for 12 out of eve:t 14 days.
Does it reduce the number of commands that we must routinely uplink? A spacecraft that can expand commands on board, use a high-order command language, or
respond to goal-oriented commands can be cheaper to operate than a spacecraft that
must be controlled by primitive, device level commands.
Does it reduce the amount of engineering and performance data that we must routinely downlink, process, and analyze on the ground? Spacecraft designed to do their
own onboard monitoring, trending, compressing, summarizing, and archiving of engineering data can substantially reduce communication costs as well as the quantity of
data that operations must deal with on the ground. Remember that spacecraft autonomy can add its oWn performance data to the set that must be routinely downlinked to

1
618

Mission Operations

the ground. The Pluto Express spacecraft is being designed to downlink only about 2%
of the total engineering data that it will collect during cruise. The 98% that won't be
routinely downlinked will be stored on the spacecraft in an onboard engineering data
archive ~d will be downlinked only in the event of a spacecraft perfonnance anomaly.
Does It reduce the amount of payload data that we must routinely downlink,
process, and analyze on the ground? Thi~ ~uestion suggests that all things being equal,
payload autonomy can reduce ops costs if It returns fewer telemetry bits while accODlplishing the. same mission goal. For FireSat, the least autonomous mode is to return aD
the data being captured by the payload sensor. A more autonomous mode would be to
have the sPacecraft decide when it was over the ocean and omit that data. An even
more autonomous mode would include onboard detection of fires, and the data downlinked would be only the fire's location and extent.
Each mission will have different answers to these autonomy questions. You must
analyze each mission's cost vs. benefit in deciding what spacecraft autonomy capabilities make sense. Autonomy can require additional spacecraft resources such as mass
power, memory, MIPS and data bus bandwidth, and the cost of these must be account~
ed for. Developing, testing, and validating flight software isn't cheap. You must
compare cost increases for development and maintenance with operational cost savings. This trade may not be favorable for short missions or single spacecraft but may
have high payoff for long duration missions or constellations. The cost lind aVailability
of space communication services and for transporting and managing data on the
ground can also influence autonomy decisions.
·1

References
Bloch, J., et al. 1994. ''The ALEXIS Mission Recovery." Paper No. AAS 94-062, in
Advances in the Astronautical Sciences: Guidance and Control 1994, R.D. Culp
and R. D. Rausch, eds., vol. 86, pp. 505-520.
Boden, Daryl G. and Wiley J. Larson. 1995. Cost-Effective Space Mission Operations.
New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc.
Cameron, G. E., J. A. Landshof, and G. W. Whitworth. 1994. "Cost Efficient
Operations for Discovery Class Missions." In Third International Symposium on
Space Mission Operations and Ground Data Systems, NASA Conference Proceedings 3281, Greenbelt, MD, November 15-18, pp. 809-816.
Carraway, John. 1994. ''Lowering Operations Costs Through Complexity Metrics."
Presented at Space Ops '94, Greenbelt, MD, November 15.
Carraway, John, and Gael Sqw'bb. 1996. "Spacecraft Autonomy Metrics." Paper No.
IAA-L-0302P, presented at the IAA Conference, JHU Applied Physics Lab,
Laurel, MD, April.

Ii

I
'I

Carraway, John, et al. 1996. "Application of Operations Concepts Methodology to
Low Cost Planetary Mission Planning, Design, and Operations." Paper No. IAAL-0504, presented at the IAA Conference, JHU Applied Physics Lab, Laurel MD,
April.
'

References

619

Carraway, John, and Gael Squibb. 1996. "Autonomy Metrics." Paper No. S096.6.09,
presented at Space Ops '96. Munich, Germany, September.
carraway, John. 1995. "Assessing Operations Complexity." Chapter 5 in CostEffective Space Mission Operations, Daryl G. Boden and Wiley J. Larson, eds..
New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc.
CSP Associates. 1999. GSFC Ground Systems Cost Model Study; Final Results:
phases 1, 11, and ID. February 9. Cambridge, MA.
Davis, G. K. 1990. ''NOAA Spacecraft Operations-An Operators Perspective."
Paper No. 90-0322 presented at the 28th Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno,
Nevada, 8-11 January.
Hughes, P. M., G. W. Shirah, and E. C. Luczak. 1994. ''Using Graphics and Expert
System Technologies to Support Satellite Monitoring at the NASA Goddard Space
Flight Center." In Third International Symposium on Space Mission Operations
and Data Systems, NASA Conference Proceedings 3281, Greenbelt, MD, November 15-18, pp. 700-712.
Jeletic, J. F. 1990. "Computer Graphics Aid Mission Operations." Aerospace America.
28(4): 28-32.
Landshof, J.A., R. J. Harvey, and M. H. Marshall. 1994. "Concurrent Engineering:
Spacecraft and Mission Operations System Design." Third International
Symposium on Space Mission Operations and Data Systems, NASA Conference
Pro.ceedings 3281, Greenbelt, MD, Nov. 15-18, 1994, pp. 1391-1397.
Ledbetter, K. W. 1995. "Mission Operations Costs for Scientific Spacecraft: The Revolution That is Needed." Acta Astronautica, vol. 35, pp. 465-473.

Mandl, D., J. Koslosky, R. Mahmot, M. Rackley, and J. Lauderdale. 1992. ''SAMPEX
Payload Operations Control Center Implementation." In Second International
Symposium on Space Mission Operations and Data Systems, Proceedings JPL
93-5, November 1~20, pp. 63-68.
Marshall, M. H., G. E. Cameron and J. A. Landshof. 1995. ''The NEAR Mission
Operations System." Acta Astronautica, vol. 35, pp. 501-506.
Marshall, M. H., J. A. Landshof and J.C. van der Ha. 1996. "Reducing Mission Operations Cost." Chapter 6 in Reducing Space Mission Cost, James R. Wertz and
Wiley J. Larson, eds. Torrance, CA and Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Microcosm
Press and Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Mazza, C. 1987. "Data Processing Systems at ESOC." Journal of the British Inter- .
planetary Society. 40 (6).

Roussel-Dupre, D., et al. 1994. "On-Orbit Science in a Small Package: Managing the
~S Satellite and Experiments." In SPIE Proceedings of Conference on Advanced Microdevices and Space Science Sensors, San Diego, CA, July 28-29, vol.
2267, pp.7~9.

620

Mission Operations

Squibb, Gael. 1995. "Developing a Mission Operations Concept." Chapter 4 in CostEffective Space Mission Operations, Daryl G. Boden and Wiley J. Larson eds
New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc.
'
.

Chapter 15

van der Ha. J. C. 1992. "Implementation of the Revised HIPPARCOS Mission at
ESOC." ESA Bulletin No. 69, February, pp. 9-15.

Ground System Design and Sizing

Wall, Stephen D. and Kenneth W. Ledbetter. 1991. Design of Mission Operations
Systems for Scientific Remote Sensing. London: Taylor & Francis.

Gary G. Whitworth, Applied Physics Laboratory
15.1 The Ground System Design Process
15.2 A Ground System's Basic Elements

GEOSAT-A "Simple" System
15.3 The Typical Ground System

Communications links; Optional Functions;
.Influence of Spacecraft Autonomy; The DMSP
Example System
15.4 Alternatives To Building a Dedicated System
The Air Force Satellite Control Network (AFSCN);
NASA Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System

(TDRSS); Commercial Ground Systems
15.5 Key Design Considerations

Coverage Required per Spacecraft; Number,
Locations, and Variety ofData Users

A ground system (1) supports the space segment (spacecraft and their payloads),
and (2) relays to users mission data generated by onboard instruments and received
from the spacecraft. Table 15-1 summarizes these ''functions'' and corresponding
options.
To support spacecraft and their payloads, the ground system must command and
control them, monitor their health, track them to determine orbital position, and determine spacecraft attitude from sensor information. The ground system controls the
spacecraft and its instruments or payloads by transmitting command data to the spacecraft. Except for passive echo tracking techniques such as radar or laser reflector, the
ground system uses spacecraft housekeeping telemetry and mission data to carry out
these functions. For example, the ground system may use instrument data from a
spaceborne radar altimeter to refme knowledge of the SP!lcecraft's orbit.
Ground stations acquire mission data from a spacecraft and its instruments and
transfer it to the data users. The ground system also supplies any telemetry and tracking information the data users may need. Most space missions allow the user's
evolving requirements to influence changes in the ground system's data relay and
control functions.
Ground systems consist of ground stations and control centers working together to
support the spacecraft and the data user. Figure 15-1 shows how these segments
interact Generally, the ground system commands and controls the spacecraft based on

621

622

Ground System Design and Sizing

The Ground System Design Process

15.1

623

TABLE 15-1. Ground System Functions and Options.
Ground System

OpUons and Considerations

Function

Key Criteria

Spacecraft/Payload Support

Command

Maintain RF
communications links

Requests

Communications architecture
- Direct (spacecraft to ground)
- Relay spacecraft

MIssIon Data
Data Relay

influence a mission by requesting commands through the ground system.

Intra-system communications required
Simulation and verification
Number of spacecraft and orbital configuration

-Cost

Tracking methods
-Range and range rate,
antenna viewing angles
-External tracking network
-Spacecraft autonomy (onboard navigation)

- Complexity
-TimeUness
-User
Transparency

Simulation and verification
- Avallabnity
Process telemetry
- Monitor spacecraft
and payload health

Number of spacecraft
(determines processing load)

- Aexlbility

requests from the data user to the control centers. Except for communications
satellites,* users do not send commands independently to the spacecraft, because its
overall health depends heavily on the state of individual instruments and systems.
The ground system tries to provide highly available, high-fidelity access to the
spacecraft while remaining transparent to both data users and ground controllers. In
practice though, we must trade off transparency and cost For example, we may accept
some distortion or loss of mission data, as well as time delays between the spacecraft
and the data users. These delays may range from subseconds to seconds for real-time
data transfer, and from days to weeks for recorded data. In supporting the spacecraft
and payload, we may need to balance length and number of opportUnities to command
or monitor the spacecraft with the risk inherent in being out of communication.
Because more complex ground systems are less transparent, we must design them
as simply as possible, consistent with mission requirements. When designing a space
mission, we should trade off space segment and ground system complexity through
several iterations, until we produce best performance at lowest cost (see Cbaps_ 3
and 4).

15.1 The Ground System Design Process

Mission Data Relay
Transport payload
mission data

- ReUability
- Survivabifrty

- Determine spacecraft
attitude

MIssIon Data

Fig. 15-1. Relation Between Space Segment, Ground System, and Data Users. Data users

Ground station configuration
- Antenna size and track rates
- RF equipment frequencies and capabilities

- Determine orbital
parameters

Space
Segment
(spacecmft)

Users

Number and locations of ground stations
- ExIsting or new
- Dedicated or shared
- Axed or mobile
-Data rates

- Issue commands

Telemetry

Data

Number of spacecraft and orbital configuration

Provide spacecraft and
payload control

Spacecraft and Payload
Support

Command
and
Tracking Data

Number and locations of data users
Intra-system communications requirements

Transport spacecraft and
Data handling capabilities
payload telemetry as
- Multiplexing and demuJtiplexing
required
- Encodlng and decoding
Provide data handUng
- Encrypting and decrypting
- Data compression
Distribute to data user
- Data storage and archiving
community
- Tlmetagglng
- Quality monitoring
Simulation and verification
Other
Support mission
operations

Space segment operations
Ground system operations

MaIntain facDity
and equipment

logistics
Spare or repair

Table 15-2 summarizes the ground system design process and references discussions pertaining to each step. This process is iterative because the steps interrelate and
we must strike a balance in complexity between the spacecraft and the ground system.
Each iteration must address:
• Ground station locations, based on spacecraft coverage and data user needs,
balanced against cost, accessibility, and available communications. You will
need new sites for a dedicated ground system, and suitable existing stations
when using established ground systems.
- Link data rates, which establish the required gain-to-noise temperature ratios
(Gil's), and effective isotropic radiated powers (ElRPs). For dedicated ground
stations, defer details of antenna and RF systems until you have establisbed
• With communications satellites, "mission" data is really communications data being relayed
between two or more "data users." Here, we simply expand the ground system's data-transfer
function to include the path from the ground system to the satellite.

Ground System Design and Sizing

624

15.2

A Ground System's Basic Elements

15.2

these two parameters. For an existing system, determine whether RF links are
adequate and adjust data rates if necessary.
• Requirements for data handling, so you can determine Where it will occur.
Once you know the location, you can meet almost any need with aVailable
hardware and software, and at reasonable cost. A decision to perform data
handling at a central facility instead of the ground station influences the location of the control centers.

FACILITY ELEMENTS

MISSION ELEMENTS

Summary of the Ground System Design Process. See text for discussion.
Step

Where Discussed

Establish number and locations of ground stations

Sees. 15.2, 15.5

Establish space-to-ground data rates

Sees. 13.2, 15.5

Determine required GfTs and EIRPs

Sees. 13.4, 15.2

Determine required data handling

Sees. 15.3, 15.5

Establish data handling location

Sec. 15.5

Decide location of Spacecraft Operations Control Center,
Payload Operations Control Centers, and Mission Control Center

Sees. 15.2, 15.3

T

Determine and select communications links

Sees. 13.3, 15.3
Sees.15.4

Iterate as needed

15.2 A Ground System's Basic Elements
Figure 15-2 shows that the ground system consists of mission elements and facility
elements. Mission elements control the space segment or handle mission data. Facility
elements support or are otherwise ancillary to mission elements. Both contain mixes
of various hardware, ftrmware, and software. (In this chapter, I will use the most common names and acronyms.) The ground system staff uses and coordinates the
operation of the physical components. Mission operations, discussed in Chap. 14,
coordinates activities for the ground system and command and control of the
spacecraft.
The ground station is the Earth-based point of communication with the space
segment for control and, typically, user data. Figure 15-3 shows the basic ground
station, which consists of the following components.
The single antenna system includes the antenna and mount, its associated electromechanical actuators, the consoles and servo circuitry which control the antenna, and
the feeds and transmission lines which carry RF signals to and from the RF equipment.
The antenna, along with the receive RF equipment, satisfies the required receive Off
at the frequency of the downlink carrier. It also works with the transmit RF equipment
to provide the required EIRP at the uplink carrier frequency. Chapter 13 discusses
these communications links. Antenna steering must provide the look angles required

• BuDdings
• UtIJIIIes
• Staff services
MaIntenance
• Mission equipment
• Plant

1

1

Operations

Staff

Staff

1

Operations

Ag. 15-2. Mission and Facility Elements for a Ground System. The staff provides the necessary operator input. Mission operations, discussed in Chap. 14, directs ail activities of
the mission.

To SpaceCraft

\

,.

Receive RF EquIpment
• Downconverslon
• Demodulation
.G/T

--.

L

MIssIon DaIa Recovery
EquIpment

• BIt synchronizers
'Bu!Iers

To_
Components

Antenna System
.G/T
• SAP
• Steering

Evaluate complete or partiai use of service-provided ground systems

Plant

Ground StatIon
SysIeITI TIming
spacecraft Operations Control Center (SOCC)
Payload Operations Control Center (POCC)
MIssion Control Center (MCC)

• Appropriate communications between ground system elements and data users
for a dedicated system. When using an existing ground system, where most
decisions are already made, confirm that data handling and bandwidth are
adequate.
TABLE 15-2.

625

Transmit RF Equipment
• RF carrier
• Modulation
• SAP

~

1

DaIa User Interlace

SWIIchlng
Communlcallons
ConnecUons

~_~C.Conligum1lon
• OperatIon

TT&C Equipment

'TeIemeIry
• Tracking

....

=:

~

To
,DaIa
Users

r

FromMCC

+---+ To SOCC. POCC. AND MCC

• Command

Ag. 15-3. The Basic Ground Station. This figure displays only the minim'um components
needed to control a spacecraft and relay mission data to users.

by the mission. For low-Earth orbit, these can cover essentially all of the visible
hemisphere. It must also provide the required steering modes, such as programmed
computer steering and autotracking. Autotracldng refers to the use of the received
spacecraft signal itself to steer the antenna. In this case, the antenna system usually
provides continuous pointing coordinates to the tracking component at the ground
station.
The receive RF equipment is generally in suites of racks, located to minimize
transmission-line losses to the antenna. This equipment accepts the downlink carrier
frequency from the antenna system, downconverts it to intermediate frequencies, and
demodulates it to baseband signals for the equipment devoted to mission data recovery
andTI&C.
Also in racks near the antenna system, the transmit RF equipment accepts tracking
and command signals from the ground system's Tf&C component and modulates
them onto the RF uplink. which it also generates. In the case of communications
satellites, it also modulates user data onto an uplink carrier.
After the RF receive equipment demodulates the signals, the mission data recovery
equipment conditions the mission data before relaying it to data users and ground

626

Ground System Design and Sizing

15.2

system components. It typically has its own location in the system. but it may be
intermingled with the receive RF suite for simple data streams.
The data user interface connects the mission data recovery equipment and the data
user. If all parts of the ground system and the data user are colocated. this interface
generally consists of no more than manual or electronic patching of the data lines
between the ground station and the user facilities.
The Telemetry, Tracking, and Command (IT&C) equipment conditions and
distributes received telemetry and tracking signals. It also electrically formats, authenticates, and times transmitted command and tracking signals. It usually processes these
tracking signals and data on th~ .antenna-pointing .angle to inform users about range,
range rate, and spacecraft poSItion. TT&C funCtions are usually highly automated
because of the need for speed, timeliness, and accuracy.
The station control center controls the configuration of, and the interconnects
between, the ground station components. Operating under instructions from the
ground system's mission control center, it keeps the ground station configured to
support mission operations.
Ground system operations require time coordination, so one system element
maintains a clock precise enough to meet mission requirements; it distributes clock
time and reference frequencies to the other system elements (see Fig. 15-4), moving
through the colocated elements of a ground system by wire or cable. It is accurate to
within milliseconds or better. Its usual one-per-second timing pulses are synchronized
to within a few microseconds or less to a world time scale, such as Universal Time
Coordinated (UTC). Satellites able to transfer time even more precisely, such as GPS,
permit us to synchronize well below a microsecond.

Sync
Clrcults

wwv

LORAN.c

GPS

1
PrecIsIon
OsciIJators

r----+

Clocks
(TIme Code ~rators)

TIme 01 Day
Countdown TIme

Elapsed MIssIon TIme

r---

J
Reference
Frequancles

~
DIstr!butIon
Subsystem

....

~

:-+

To
Ground
System

-.

Rg. 15-4. The System TIming Element. This synchronizes the elements of a ground system by
distributing precision time and frequency.

Three types of control centers are generally found within ground systems. The
Spacecraft Operations Control Center (SOCG) monitors and commands the
sp~ bus and common systems, as opposed to onboard instruments or payloads,
which are controlled by the POCC, as discussed below. The sacc analyzes spacecraft
telemetry and, when necessmy, telemetry and mission data from instruments which
can affect the spacecraft's attitude and dynamics. As the only ground system element
that directly commands the spacecraft, it coordinates and controls POCC access.
Specifically, it approves the POCC's requests to command instruments after consider-

15.2

A Ground System's Basic Elements

6'1.7

ing mission plans and schedules, spacecraft health, and the collective well being of the
other instruments on board.
For simple spacecraft, the SOCC also serves as the POCC. On the other hand, we
ay need several sacCs if the space segment is complex. An eXanlple might be one
m· th several complicated spacecraft requiring intensive and near-continuous monitor~g and control, such as ground systems which provide user services to other missions
(see Sec: ~5.4). We may ~so need more than one SOCC for backup or for security,
survivability, or other political reasons.
Equipment and people make up the sacCo The hardware includes data monitoring
equipment and consoles, commanding facilities, ~d associated communications: This
equipment is usually computer automated for qwck response, but humans may mtervene at any time to control the spacecraft..
. .
The Payload Operations Control Center (POCG) analyzes telemetry and mISSIon
data from onboard payload instruments and issues commands to these instruments. Its
commands depend on approval by the mission control center, with coordination from
the sacCo Interactive computer equipment also runs the POCC, with people standing
by during communication with the spacecraft.
.
.
We may use multiple POCCS when several onboard lDStruments ~ ~ful
independent supervision or when we need a backup for redundancy or sUlVlvability.
We may also need or want to place the POCCS for some instruments near the manufacturer or the data user.
The Mission Control Center (MCG) plans and operates the entire space missi()n,
including the configuration and scheduling of resources for both space and ground
system. It computes and issues information needed by ground system elements and
data users, such as data on the spacecraft's orbit, ground station pass times, and antenna pointing angles. In simpler systems, we may merge the MCC with the sacCo
MCCs are best placed near the POCCS and SOCCS, but niission requirements or
other considerations often call for placement elsewhere, thus greatly complicating the
ground system. Location of the MCC depends on security, survivability, and political
or administrative considerations. Sometimes, redundancy demands several MCCs
-one as prime and the others as backups. If ground systems provide services to user
missions, each user mission will have a dedicated MCC. These MCCs are frequently,
but not necessarily, colocated. The host mission MCC may also, but again not necessarily, be near the user MCCs.
The software used for MCC and POCC activities is covered in more detail in
Chap. 14. It is worth noting here, however,that there has in recent years become
available commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) software for integration testing as well as
mission and payload operations, analysis, and planning, and ground system operation.
The best of these packages are very powerful, yet tailorable to a specific spacecraft,
alleviating the need for a program to develop expensive mission-unique software.
Most of these offerings are very efficient and versatile, permitting large reductions in
the required operations team.
Plant facilities include buildings and grounds, utilities, services for the staff, and
security. We normally would use commercial utilities with locally generated backup
for emergencies. For security and survivability, utilities may be wholly self-contained.
Because plants are expensive, we must decide whether to build unique, dedicated
systems or to use existing alternative systems (see Sec. 15.4).
Availability is the percentage of time a ground system is available to support a
mission. The availitbility we want in a system determines whether maintenance should

'

~
'I

1,1

IJ'

628

Ground System Design and Sizing

15,2

i

use spare or repair. To achieve high availability often requires hot spares (powered on
and ready for operation at a moment's notice).
Figure 15-5 shows the physical layout of a simple ground system with its data users
colocated, eliminating the need for long-distance communications links between
them. Such a system can provide low-coverage support of up to several spacecraft in
low-Earth orbit on a timeshared basis, or virtually 100% coverage for a single spacecraft in geostationary orbit One of its advantages is that it can be dedicated to a
particular mission, thereby eliminating schedule conflicts. Also, it is compact and self
contained, allowing all communications between elements to be local and dedicated
thus simplifying the system's operation and administration.

EJ

~ I
Antenna
ConIrcl
Room

I

RF

I I

TT&C

Room

Command Equip.

EquIpment]

MIssIon Data Room

Transmit RF Equipment

I Tracking EquIp. II

El

MIssIon Data Recovery

EquIpment Room

I Telemetry EquIpment I

POCC

I I

ReceIve RF Equipment

I

Data User Interface

1= I

I

Data User Room

StaIIon ConIrcl
Room

Staff SeJVlces

socc

I Mru~_

POCC
AdmInIs!ralive
Offices

POCC
MCC

POCC

15.3

The Typical Gronnd System

629

recover from any major damage. For this reason, the military would generally not want
a simple or basic system.

15.2.1 GEOSAT-A ''Simple'' System
Though not as "simple" as the basic system described above, the GEOSAT' s
ground system shown in Fig. 15-6 is a good practical example. It supports only one
spacecraft with one ground station and colocated components. Launched in the spring
of 1985, this remote, ocean-sensing spacecraft is supported through an S-band telemetry and data downlink, a VHF command uplink, and VHF Doppler beacons for
tracking. The ground system provides full telemetry, data, and command support of
the spacecraft. It is located under one roof at the Johns Hopkins University's Applied
Physics Laboratory in Laurel, Maryland, except for the Doppler tracking equipment in
the worldwide system of TRANET Doppler tracking stations.
Figure 15-6 is a functional diagram of the ground system showing in solid lines its
three major segments: the satellite test facility, the digital element, and the computer
system. The figure and nomenclature reflect diagrams typically seen in descriptions
of the GEOSAT ground system. The overlaid dotted boxes show how the functions
fit into the basic components of a ground system with some functions overlapping.
For example, the real-time frame sync and decommutator is involved in operations
for both mission data recovery and IT&C, and the computer system supports many of
the basic components. Further; as is often the case with simpler ground systems, the
SOCC, POCC, and MCC are in one unit. Note that we have not yet discussed some of
the functions, especially for mission data recovery equipment and the data user
interface, which demand more than our simple ground system can provide.

Lobby

FIg. 15-5. A Typical Installation for a Basic Ground System. Depending on the number of
POCCs, the total area occupied may be between 100 and 500 m2 • The need for
significant staff services can greatly increase the area for remote Instafiations. See
text for discussion.

Unfortunately, this simple ground system also has significant disadvantages. For
example, the single ground station provides very low coverage for low-Earth orbit
spacecraft because a pass (the time period that the spacecraft is in view of a ground
station) lasts only a few minutes, and for other than near-equatorial orbits, does not
occur often. As Sec. 15.5 points out, these conditions prevail because the maximum
viewing angle of a low-Earth orbit spacecraft from any point on the Earth is 20% or
less of the orbital path, and for inclinations above 25 or 30 deg, only 25 to 30% of the
orbits are visible. An exception is polar orbits as seen from polar ground stations,
where each orbit is visible. (See Chap. 5 for visibility formulas.) Another limit is the
system's inability to support more than one spacecraft link at a time because of the
single antenna and ground station. Also, the simple system can serve only on-site
users. The system's most important disadvantage, however, is its lack of redundancy.
If any element were to fail we would lose data, or possibly even a spacecraft. Thus,
redundant equipment, spares, and maintenance, as well as geographical location, are
particularly important To be secure, a completely colocated ground system should be
on domestic soil. Even so, it will not be very survivable, and it will take a long time to

15.3 The Typical Ground System
To support a realistic space mission, a ground system must usually provide high
coverage simultaneously for several spacecraft in various orbits, with high levels of
availability, security, and, for military missions, survivability. Such a system will
usually include many elements in several configurations. The realistic system in
Fig. 15-7 includes standard stations and less capable auxiliary stations, which may be
on aircraft, ships, or land. These auxiliary stations fill gaps in coverage, using equipment similar to that of regular stations and providing radar tracking, telemetry, data
reception, and backup command.
In a real ground system, we may also employ multiple control centers in separate
locations. Thus, as shown, some POCCs are near the SOCC, whereas some are remote.
In this generic system, we designate a SOCC as prime, colocate it with a prime MCC,
and back up both prime centers with remote centers. Multiple control centers are
redundant, survivable, and flexible, allowing responsibility for prime control to pass
back and forth between the centers during various phases of the mission. For example,
we may make the remote SOCC prime during launch and early checkout of the space
segment because it is near the launch or simulation equipment
Geographical dispersion and multiplicity of elements greatly complicate a ground
system's design. For example, each location must usually have its own synchronized
timing system, similar to that for the colocated ground system described ~lier.
Further, the distributed system requires several physical plants with different admin-

~!
!~

Ground System DesIgn and Sizing

630

15.3

The Typical Ground System

15.3

631

i\,i
'I

I
!

~nm~~on--------------------------------

I
I
I
I
I

Satellite Test
FacHfty

r-·---··..--·---····..··--··----·:
i

i

I

I

I

:

ii

J

r

.Backup

1

MCC

!

(DomestIc)

--~-~~:------~

.

Rscshm

Ii Equfpmsnt
RF

!

i

L_

-

..

[:

..

---~-.---.---:----...."",."....-...

I

DaIa

::::::z,

!
Tmnsm/tRFI
EquJpmem

i

oamsat

(ForBIlIn)

!~~~~RealTlme
l~
Playback

I

I

I.andIIne

_.---._-

-:z...-

L. _____..-.. -l----.-..__...._

FIg. 15-7. Model of a Typical Ground System. Data Is relayed betWeen remote ground
stations, backup control centers, and data users, by various communication links.
(See text for discussion of these links.) Umited capability stations often supplement
standard stations.

---4J

I

istrative structures, complicated maintenance and logistics networks, and reliable
communications links-all difficult and expensive to implement for remote locations.
Thus that remote tracking station in East Africa, for example, needed to fill a small but
important gap in ground station coverage, may be disproportionately expensive.

-t-----t---t

__ =-=0". -l-- __ _
!

ITT&o

Digital
Element

iEquipment

!!

' - - - -..

_------_:

:
:
:

ir--......L-..,

!L..-~_..J

To

:

!

I

DaIa

'!
.,

~:

I

Users

~~

_____.•___•.•

RadIo Unk

_.j

Rg.15-6. Block Diagram for the GEOSAT Ground System. The large solid blocks (with
underlined labels) show the system broken down Into GEOSAT-unlque segments.
The dashed lines (with bold labels) show the clMslon Into elements as defined in
Ag. 15-2. The dotted line (with italic labels) shows the division Into components as
defined In Rg. 15-3.

15.3.1 Communications Links
Ground systems need long-distance communications links of sufficient bandwidth
between their distributed elements and between them and the data users. These links
mix landline (electrical, terrestrial microwave, and optical) and satellite connections.
Unless the links are part of the ground system itself, they are usually subscribed to or
leased.
We evaluate communications options while determining where to locate the ground
system's components. For example, we may want to place the SOCC or the MCC Ilear
a metropolitan area to take advantage of its telephone system, but we would want to
place ground stations in less populated areas to lessen radio-frequency interfereDce.
Yet installing new and dedicated communication facilities in a remote area may be
quite costly.
As international, commercial domestic, and military satellite communications have
become more available, we now prefer satellites to provide communications between
remote ground system elements and data users. Because of their high capacity and
perfonnance, communications satellites (comsats) link nearly all intercontinental
elements of ground systems as well as those lying far apart within continents. World-

632

Ground System Design and Sizing

ISJ

wide systems may require more than one "hop," and more than one comsat For
example, a ground station located in India might communicate with a SOCC in the
United States by accessing an international satellite through a domestic communica_
tions satellite (domsat). Table 15-3 shows several geostationary communications
satellites typically used by ground systems with elements around the world In general,
portions or all of the available transponder bandwidth may be leased. Martin [1984]
has summarized the technical details of these satellites, and user information is available from the operating agency. A good basic reference on satellite communications
is Pratt and Bostian [1986].
Even when using comsats, we may need landlines to connect to the ground terminals which access the comsats. With many domsats and military communications
systems, we may be able to use locally placed comsat terminals with user antennas that
access the communication satellite directly. For international satellites, we must
usually link in to a central ground terminal which accesses the satellite. This link is
usually some form of landline, normally a leased telephone line with a high data rate.
To access these communications links, each element requires terminal equipment,
whose complexity depends on the type oflink. (Satellite links generally are most complex.) Domestic satellite links usually include options to build, lease, or buy the
terminal equipment Military communications systems provide qualified users links
through small local tenninals and centralized communications stations. Unfortunately,
the small tenninals often support relatively narrow bandwidths not suitable to relaying
high speed data.
Thanks to the recent explosion in the ubiquity and versatility of communications
products for networking, an increasing trend in moving data around a ground system
is to use the Internet Protocol (IP) family of protocols. Physical connections can range
from common low rate dialup lines to high speed dedicated channels. For low rate
data, it is feasible to move data between system elements using real-time IP protocols.
High rate data is generally stored initially at a ground station, and forwarded postpass
by protocols such as FTP (File Transfer Protocol). With IP connections, the transport
protocol may be either TCP or UDP. * Where dialup or dedicated lines are used, so that
the potential for data loss is low, the ground system may use UDP, for the increased
data efficiency it provides.
15.3.2 Optional Functions

Each element of the typical system may include functions beyond those in the basic
elements. A good example is the ground station, which can be far more complex than
the basic station we examined earlier. These stations may need several antennas to
support more than one RF link or spacecraft at a time. The antennas may have multiple
feeds to pennit simultaneous links at different RF frequencies, or polarization diversity to pennit simultaneous multiple links at the same frequency. Multiple RF links
in tum require more RF and data recovery equipment, with enhanced performance
needed to allow higher data rates and more sophisticated modulation techniques. Improved IT&C equipment pennits increased rates for telemetry and command, more
precise tracking, and coverage for several spacecraft at one time. We may also add to
the ground station new functions such as simulation and verification systems.

* TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) provides a degree of assured data delivery, and adds
overhead to the data transfer. UDP (User Datagram Protocol) uses less overhead but provides
no assurance of delivery of any packet of data.

The Typical Ground System

15.3

633

TABLE 15-3. Typical Geostationary Communications Satellites.
Operator

SatelIHe

Bandwidth at
(Up/Down Frequency)

Longitude
(deg)

INTERNATIONAL
Intelsat V-A

Intelsat

36 to 72 MHz (614 GHz)

6O,63,66E

72,77,241 MHz (14111 GHz) 1, 18.5,21.5,
InteisatVI

Intelsat

36 to 72 MHz (614 GHz)

22,27.5,34.5 W

72 to 159 MHz (14111 GHz)
Symphonfe

CIFAS (Fr-Germ)

90 MHz (614 GHz)

11.5W
112.5W

DOMESTIC
AnlkC

Telesat Canada

54 MHz (14112 GHz)

Westar

Western Union

36 MHz (614 GHz)

91 W

Telstar3

AT&T

34 MHz (614 GHz)

87.95W

RCA

RCA Americom

34 MHz (614)

66,83,119,131,

Marisat

Comsat General

4 MHZ (1.611.5 GHz)

73,176.5E

4 MHz (614 GHz)

15W

135,139W

25, 500 kHz (UHF)
L-Sat

ESA

40 MHz (30120 GHz)

18W

CS,CS2

NASOA (Japan)

200 MHz (614 & 30/20 GHz)

13O,135E

130 MHz (30120 GHz)

MILITARY
NATO III

NATO

17,50,85 MHz (8fT GHz)

18,22.5,50W

FlTSATCOM

Navy Comm. Cmd

5; 25, 500 KHz (UHF)

23,93,100W

LEASAT

Navy Comm. Cmd

5, 25, 500 KHz (UHF)

72.5,172 E
5,75,176E
23,100W
DSCSII

Oef. Comm. Agency

50. 125. 185 MHz (8fT GHz)

66.8.140.175 E

DSGSIII

O8f. Comm. Agency

50, 50, 85 MHz (8fT GHz)

54,175 E

100 MHz (UHF)

13,135W

MILSTAR*

50th Space Wing

44 GHz, 20 GHz
400 MHz, 225 MHz

12OW,4E

13,130, 135 W

'Data from MILSTAR SGLS Student Guide, March 1997.

Data users' demands usually make ground systems more complex. The user
interface must have versatile switching and interconnection options and connect to
long-distance communications links. We may need to add data-handling equipment to
distribute received data to different users. Data handling includes all processing of
mission data between the ground station's data recovery equipment and the data user's
communications interface. Sklar [1988] has rigorously defined various data handling
operations, but I· will summarize the most common functions in the following
paragraphs.

~

I

I

i.
;
[

634

Ground System Design and Sizing

15.3

Demultiplexing refers to the disassembly of composite data streams received from
spacecraft into selected component data streams for routing to different users. With
multiple POCCs, and possibly with multiple SOCCs, telemetry data also may require
demultiplexing.
Classified or otherwise secure data from spacecraft is often encrypted on board
before transmitting it to the ground where it is decrypted. The data then either flows to
its users directly, without decryption, or it is decrypted before distribution preparatory
to demultiplexing or other data-handling"operations. Of course, some data may be reencrypted before transmission to some users. To prevent unauthorized commanding
by others, command data is often encrypted as well.
.
.
We may apply encoding, a technique which decreases errors in digital data because
of noise, to data streams from spacecraft. We may decode this received data in the
ground system and possibly reencode it before distribution. Command data is frequently encoded to ensure the spacecraft receives error-free commands.
Data compression refers to the increase in the infonnation capacity of a data stream
to permit delivering its infonnation through a narrower band communications channel
than would otherwise be possible. Alternatively, a compressed data stream can transmit more information over a given bandwidth medium. This technique permits us to
combine one or more data streams into a composite data stream (that is, multiplexing,
the reverse of the demultiplexing described earlier), and distribute it over a communications link which could not handle uncompressed data: We can also use
data compression for a ground system with limited storage and to distribute received
data more quickly.
Timetagging means adding timing infonnation to data streams. If data is not timetagged at the spacecraft, either the ground station or the data-handling equipment may
apply time information to it before recording it or distributing it to users. Usually, we
would add an epoch time reference to the data stream in one of several ways. We could
reference it to the station timing system, by giving the time at which data was received
at the ground station, with at least first-order corrections for known equipment delays.
With more sophisticated systems, we could continuously correct the epoch with orbital
information to estimate the actual time the spacecraft generated the data. To interpolate the timing of data between epochs, we can use the data clock itself as a time scale
(for synchronous data only).
Instead of routing received data to users immediately, we may wish to record all or
some of it, referred to as data storage, and transmit it later. Also, we may avoid wideband communications links by first recording higher rate data and then transmitting it
to users at lower playback rates. In all cases, storage protects against loss of data
during distribution. Magnetic tape has been the storage medium of choice, but optical
storage may eventually supersede it for very large amounts of data.
Data quality monitoring means examining the quality of the space-to-ground data
link by checking predictable groups of bits or waveforms in the received spacecraft
data stream. For example, with synchronous digital data, we can use frame-synchronization words to count the bit error rate and make sure the link is working properly. In
this way, we can monitor all parts of the ground system used to relay mission data.
These data-handling operations may take place anywhere in the ground system. For
small systems with only one or two ground stations, we would typically handle the
data within the ground station, and transmit it directly to the user. In doing so, we can
reduce bandwidths in communications links to users by separating high-rate composite data streams into their components and compressing the data at the ground station.

15.3

The Typical Ground System

635

We can also control data security, preserve signal-ta-noise quality in the data stream,
and suppress accumulated distortions by processing data as quickly as possible after
receiving and demodulating it The ground station usually stores and timetags data as
well because mission data has the smallest delay uncertainties there.
Although the ground station usually does the data-handling tasks best, a system
with several ground stations would need links between each of the ground stations and
each of the users to transfer the data-an impractical if not impossible arrangement
Thus, ground stations often transfer da~ ~tly to a central f~ty (the SOCC for
example), handling only selected operations, such as recording, the~lves. The
central facility passes the data on to the users. This procedure minimIzes ground
station hardware, centralizes control, and gives more flexible service to data users. It
usually requires dedicated communications links between the ground stations and the
central facility, which can support higher data rates than might otherwise be necessary.
Simulation/Verijication (SimlVer) systems test the ground system's readiness using
realistic simulated signals and data. Tests may be at routine intervals, during prepass
or postpass, or following system maintenance or upgrade. SimNer also provides diagnostics for troubleshooting and calibrates equipment When fully implemented. a
SiroNer system not only can test individual ground system elements and components,
but also can perform highly automated end-ta-end tests of the entire ground system.
But this type of SimNer system is expensive, employed only within elements whose
availability is critical.
15.3.3 Intluence of Spacecraft Autouomy
Spacecraft autonomy could potentially simplify the tasks of !he SOCC, POCC; and
rr&C elements of the ground system. But unpredictable spacecraft upsets and
malfunctions, including those in the autonomous systems themselves, will force us to
use ground elements at the same level for some time. For example, onboard clocks
may timetag data as it is generated, but the ground system's ability to timetag received
data will probably be retained as a backup for the foreseeable future.
15.3.4 The DMSP Example System
The Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) is an example of a typical
distributed ground system. Using remote-sensing satellites in low-Earth orbit, it pr0vides the Department of Defense important environmental information. Figure 15-8
shows its main elements. The spacecraft links are at L-band (1,750 to 1,850 MHz) for
the uplink and S-band (2,200 to 2,300 MHz) for the downlink. Data rates for these
links are 2 kbps (command) and 1,024 kbps (mission data), respectively. The DMSP
grotmd stations are referred to as Command Readout Stations (CRS). They are supplemented by the Automated Remote Tracking Stations of the Air Force Satellite Control
Network's (AFSCN) ground system.
Mission data is transferred from ground stations to DMSP central facilities by
domestic satellite and landlines. The data is then relayed by similar communications
links to the large data processing users, the Navy oceanographic, and Air Force
weather forecasting centers. This system also is an example of a mission in which
some data users receive mission data directly from the spacecraft. Shipboard and transportable landbased terminals throughout the world receive data on local environmental
conditions directly for immediate use.
We might also note that with the current trend for commercial satellites which
provide imaging and other forms of remote sensing, advances in receiver technology

Ground System Design and Sizing

15.4

-

-:z....

LandlIno
Domsalllnlt

~=Irom

-=::!"

I~I
MonIeroy. CA .

0IIut AFB. Omaha. NE

FIg. 15-8. The DMSP Ground System. It uses landlines and domsats to connect various ground
stations to control centers and central facilities and for relay of data to large military
data processing centers. Shipboard and mobile terminals receive data directJy from
the DMSP satellite.

and commercial processing software are now permitting private users to receive such
data directly from these satellites at reasonable cost.

15.4 Alternatives To Building a Dedicated System
Instead of building a dedicated system, we can use existing ground support
networks to supply part or all of the elements needed. A number of commercial and
military ground systems can handle more than one mission and are available to support
user missions. In this service-provided arrangement, the host ground system provides
most of the elements of the users ground system. Blit these existing configurations
cannot satisfy all possible missions, so host systems are usually tailored to particular
kinds. Where necessary, a user mission may have to provide some special equipment,
but they can reduce the amount by designing missions to match the host's configuration wherever possible. In fact, users must usually meet severe constraints to make
their missions compatible with the host system and other user missions.
Normally, full-service host systems provide all necessary elements of the ground
system, which all users share. Major communication links connect ground stations to
a central facility which houses the user mission's poces, soces and MCC. Either
the host or the user mission may supply the equipment and personnel for these centers.
The central facility probably also contains the host's SOCC and perhaps, the prime or
backupMCC.

Alternatives To BuDding a Dedicated System

637

Use of service-provided ground systems may follow a hybrid arrangement,
ombining some dedicated elements from the user mission with others from one or
~re host systems. Actually, most service-provided systems require some ground
system construction and some significant elements, or parts of elements, from the user
mission.
These alternative systems have some important advantages over dedicated ones.
For example, they usually save a lot of money and have a defined and predictable cost
schedUle. Another advantage is high, predictable reliability and availability. Although
not necessarilY designed for it, most are highly survivable because they have many
dispersed assets on the ground, making them important for military missions.
Alternative systems also have disadvantages. For example, matching the user
mission with the system may make the overall mission less effective. Sharing host
resources with other supported missions also demands coordination of activities and
priorities, based on such things as the supported mission's relative importance, criticality of particular events, and the amount of control the host has over the ground
assets. Contractual negotiations usually determine these priority agreements.
To evaluate potential alternatives to dedicated systems, we must begin by defining
the requirements for key mission parameters and then matching them against the
candidate host systems. As with a dedicated system, we would try to adapt the requirements to the host whenever possible through studies and discussions between planners
of mission and host systems. To be efficient, we should evaluate all potential host systems at the same time. Further, if possible, we shoUld examine service-provided
systems while developing the preliminary design of a dedicated system, if we are
considering one. The [mal configuration of our ground system woUld therefore be
based on the best possible information.
In evaluating service-provided ground systems, we must determine how much
users must tailor their missions, how much equipment users must provide, and how
much access users have to ground stations or central distribution points. We would
also need to consider the loading, lifetime, and upgrades planned for host systems.
Another important comparison is between the well defined leasing costs of the host
system, and the cost of building and maintaining a dedicated system, both evaluated
over the mission's lifetime.
15.4.1 The Air Force Satellite Control Network (AFSCN)
An example of a service-provided ground system is the Air Force Satellite Control
Network, AFSCN, a major ground system operated by the United States Air Force. It
has 8 ground stations, called Automated Remote Tracking Stations (RTS), located
throughout the world. Six of these are dual stations, able to support 2 spacecraft simUl- .
taneously. These stations communicate with 2 central facilities or nodes, called the
Consolidated Space Test Center (CSTC) in Sunnyvale, California, and the Consolidated Space Operations Center (CSOC) at Falcon Air Force Base, Colorado, through an
array of ground links and communications satellites, including DSCS, GE, and Intelsat Each user mission's SOCC, POCC, and MCC are generally combined into a single
MCC at one of the central nodes, with facilities including computers and software for
both operations and planning.
Table 15-4 lists locations and key parameters for the AFSCN stations. To support
spacecraft links, each station has 18 m and 14 m parabolic antennas, with RF and datahandling equipment for IT&C and mission data. The system of RF links with

~

Ground System DesIgn and Sizing

638

!I

15.4

spacecraft is known as the S-band Space-Ground Link Subsystem (SGIS)." The down_
links provide telemetry and mission data rates (signaling bit rates) up to 1.024 Mbps
The ~links permit command rates of 2 kbps. Most RTSs also support non-SGtS
downlinks at data rates up to 5 Mbps. The network has strong antijam and SurviVal
capabilities.
TABLE 15-4. AFSCN Ground StaUons. Six of the Remote Tracking Stations (RTS) are dllal
sites, eapable of supporting two spacecraft simultaneously. See Chap. 13 for
explanation of communications parameters GIT and EIRP.
StatIon and Antenna (1)

,

i
I

New Hampshire
(Manchester)

18m (2)

GIT

location
Deg:mln

SGLS

Non-SGLS

IdBW)

42:57N

22..7

21.5

76.0

71:38W

24.1

252

75.0

22..5

21.7

72.7

24.1

252

75.0

EIRP(3)

(NHS)

14m

Vandenberg AFB
(Lompoc, CA)

18m

(VTS)

14m

Hawaii (Oahu) (HTS)

18m

21:34N

22..5

21.7

72.7

14m

158:15W

24.1

252

75.0

18m

13:37

22..7

21.5

76.0

Guam (GTS)

34:50N
120:30W

14m

144:52 E

24.1

252

75.0

Diego Garcia
(OOS)

10m

727N
72:37E

18.1

17.3

72.0

Thule (Greenland)
(TIS)

4m

76:31 N

7.7

-

61.5

14m

68:36

24.1

25.2

75.0

Oakhanger (England)
(TCS)

18m
10m

51:07 N
OO:54W

25.0
18.1

Pike
(CTS)

10m

38:8N
104:5W

18.1

-

76.0
72.0

17.3

72.0

(1) Acronyms are AFSCN Identlllers; parabolic antenna dlameters are In meters.
(2) TT&C only.
(3) Nominal for 1 kW transmitter power; EIRP Is 10 dB higher when using 10 kW transmitter.

A collection of detailed technical infonnation on the AFSCN is available [Klements, 1987]. You may learn more about its use from the Air Force Systems
Command, CSOC/5Oth OSS/Falcon AFB, Colorado.

• The SGLS incorporates 20 distinct and paired uplink and downlink channels. Uplink, or
command channels, are in the 1,750 to 1,850 MHz range, and downlink channels are from
2,200 to 2,300 MHz. Each channel consists of a single uplink carrier and two downlink
carriers which can be received simultaneously by an RTS to provide range and range rate,
spacecraft telemetry, and mission data.

15.4

Alternatives To .Building a Dedicated System

639

15.4.2 NASA Tracking and
Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS)
Although it is not literally a ground support network. the TDRSS is the current
support system for NASA satellites. Becoming operational in the mid-1980s, it
replaced most of the Ground Space Tracking and Data Network. With its constellation
of 3 geosynchronous relay satellites, the system can support up to 20 subsynchronous
satellites with multiple-access S-band links, and two each single-access links at
S-band and at Ku-band. The multiple-access links support satellites simultaneously at
fixed frequencies of 2,106.4 MHz for the forward or command link (uplink) and
2,287.5 MHz for the return or downlink. The S-band single-access link supports one
spacecraft at a time, with a frequency between 2,025 and 2,120 MHz for the forward
path and between 2,200 and 2,300 MHz for the return path. Ku-band frequencies are
13.775 GHz forward and 15.003 GHz return.
The multiple-access links support spacecraft at lower data rates for extended
periods. They use electronic beam forming by the TDRSS and signal separation by
pseudorandom noise codes to discriminate between spacecraft. The single-access links
provide users high data rates for short periods. With any of these links, the relay satellites pass signals between the user spacecraft and a single ground station located at
White Sands, New Mexico. The system provides full TI&C and mission data, but the
user spacecraft must match standard communications requirements and have standard
IT&C hardware on board.
Figures 15-9 and 15-10 show the communications system perfonnance required of
user spacecraft. Figure 15-9 gives the spacecraft receiver Grr required for the forward
(command) link to yield a bit error rate of 10-5• Figure 15-10 illustrates how much
E1RP a user spacecraft return link must have for the same bit error rate of mos. In
Fig. 15-10, "Power Received" refers to the power (in dBW) in the return signal at the
TDRS spacecraft without the gain of the TDRSS receive antenna. In other words, it is
the power in dBW of the user spacecraft's return signal after the space and absorption
losses descn"bed in Chap. 13 are added to the user spacecraft's EIRP. ''Encoded data"
refers to data convolutionally encoded at rate 112. (See Sec. 13.3.3.) The user spacecraft's signal power received at the TDRS must be on the curves ofFig.15-10 to reach
the Achievable Data Rate. Multiple access users must not exceed the curve by more
than 3 dB-and then only by arrangement with the TDRSS. For both figures, the
extent of the curve shows the permitted range of data rates.
The TDRSS ground station acts as a bent pipe for user command, telemetry, and
mission data. It accepts previously formatted command data and routes telemetry and
mission data to the user mission's POCC, SOCC, and MCC through the NASA
NASCOM communications network. Although the TDRSS does not supply control
centers for user missions, we can arrange to use standardized control centers (referred
to by NASA as POCCs) at either Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, or at Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. (These poces essentially
combine the ground system's three basic control centers.) A mission may also have
unique control centers remote from the NASA sites, but it must provide the required
communications links with the NASCOM nodes at these sites.
Technical details and information on contracting to use the TDRSS are available in
a NASA document [Goddard Space Flight Center, 1984, as revised]. To learn more
about how to use the TDRSS, contact the Project Manager for Space Network, Code
452, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland.

640

Ground System Design and Sizing

15.4

20r------r------r-----~----~~----~~
10r------t------+-----~------_6~----~_J

m O~----_t------~----~~----~------+_~
:s.
I
~

i

-10 r------+----~~----_I'___,..+--_+_------_l_~

§

i

~

-201--------I<=--.,.,£.~r_~~~~~--~---

MA: Multiple ~
SSA: S-Band Single Access
KSA: Ku-Band Single Access

10-5

1K

10K

BIt Error Rate

1001<

1M

10M

Achievable Data Rate (bps)

Fig. 15-9.

TDR~ Forward Unk G/T vs. Achievable Data Rate. These are typical GiTs
See text for discussion.

reqUired for user spacecraft.

-150 r------,------.-------,------,-------.-----------<
. 300M

I-l~r_----~-----f------+_----~----~~--~~~
Q)

a::

;-1~r_----t_----+-~~~--~~--~~~~_t~

I

a:: -180 f---~~7~=:::::;~===~=~_l---__J--J

J

-190 r_----+------.,,L/.-------I-

MA: Multiple Al:cess
SSA: 8-Band SIngle Al:cess
KSA: KU-Band Single Al:cess
10-5 Bft Error Ra1e

-200~-~~-~=_-~~--~~-~--~~~
100
lK
10K
lOOK
1M
100M

Achievable Data Rate (bps)

Rg.15-10. TDR~Requlred Return Unk Power Versus Achievable Data Rate. This is the
effective power at the TORS spacecraft antenna befora the antenna gain is added.
See text for further discussion.

15.4.3 Commercial Ground Systems
~ith ~e mid-'90s trend for the federal government to get out of the space-related
services m general, and ground system services in particular, commercial ground

15.4

Alternatives To BuDding a Dedicated System

641

system services are becoming available. The earliest of these ground systems, expected to be in operation in the late '90s, are fairly small, with initial assets consisting
of twO to four ground station sites and a central facility for control of the ground
stations and for command, telemetry, and scheduling interfaces to the user. The ground
stations are usually located at either or both low latitudes for spacecraft with low
inclinations, and at very high latitudes, for polar orbiting spacecraft. The operators of
some of these systems plan on providing links to government-owned or other private
assets in the future.
Initially planned to provide services for scientific satellites, these commercial
systelDS currently offer a mix of S-band and X-band downlink and S-band uplink
services between the spacecraft and groundstation. The S-band downlinks provide
housekeeping and payload data rates up to 10 or 15 MHz. Data rates to 150 MHz are
served by the X-band downlinks. Uplink (command) data rates generally reach to
1 MHz. Ku-band operations are planned for the near future to accommodate the very
high data rates of remote sensing spacecraft. These systems support both traditional
TDM (Time Division Multiplexed) and CCSDS (Consultative Committee For Space
Data Systems) spacecraft telemetry formats.
As a spacecraft program we might contract to use only the ground stations of one
of these commercial ground systems. However, going beyond providing merely
Tf&C services, these private ground systems anticipate being able eventually to provide a full range of optional services including mission operations. After initial fixed
charges, the costs of using these systems will be based principally upon use, generally
calculated on a "per pass" basis. It is generally expected that these systems will serve
not only the private space industry, but that Government agencies such as NASA will
turn to them as well.
The user's primary communications with these commercial ground systems for
command, telemetry, and scheduling are usually via Internet Protocol (lP). Physical
connections can range from common low rate dialup lines to high speed dedicated
lines. When using dialup or dedicated lines, where data security and delays are not
serious problems, the ground system user may use the User Datagram Protocol (UDP)
for efficiency. It is even feasible for spacecraft with low to medium downlink data
rates, and where security and data latency for both command and telemetry are not
critical, that the user's link with the ground system may simply be through the ubiquitous Internet "cloud." (It is advisable to use TCP here however, since even though it
may slow down the average dataflow rate, it provides much more assurance that no
data will be lost.) The transfer of high-rate spacecraft telemetry is generally stored
locally at the station and transferred postpass by an efficient network protocol such as
FfP, or shipped on a high density digital medium. Commanding may be either real
time or store-and-forward at the system's central facility.
Two such commercial offerings are Universal Spacenet's Commercial Ground
Network (CGN) and the Ground Network System (GNS) being developed by Allied
Signal Technical Service Corporation. Spacenet plans to have X- and S-band stations
in Alaska and Hawaii by 1999. Information on the use of the CGN is available from
Universal Spacenet, 417 Caredean Drive, Suite A, Horsham, PA 19044. By the year
2000, Allied Signal will initially offer high latitude S- and X-Band stations in Greenland, Alaska, and Norway. Subsequent lower latitude stations, as well as ties to other
existing stations are planned. Information on the GNS can be obtained from Allied
Signal Technical Services Corporation, PO Box 5555, One Bendix Road, Columbia,
MD21045.

642

Ground System Design and Sizing

IS.s

15.5 Key Design Considerations
Two key conSiderations in ground system design are the coverage required per
spacecraft aDd the number, locations, and vanety of data users. Together, they
determine the number, location, and complexity of ground stations, of POCCS and
SOCCS, and of the links which provide communications between the various system
elements and data users.
15.5.1 Coverage Required per Spacecraft
The coverage required per spacecraft largely determines the number of ground
antennas and ground stations necessary to support a mission. Coverage refers to how
frequently and for what percentage of time a spacecraft must communicate with the
ground system. For geostationary orbits, a single ground station can provide virtually
continuous coverage. But low-Earth orbits may require many ground stations because
each station has a limited time of view. This time limitation is described in Sec. 53 in
which the time that the example satellite is in view of a ground station is calculated to
be 12.3 min. Note that this is almost the maximum viewing time because this is nearly
an overhead pass. The average viewing time will be considerably less than 12 min.
These short viewing times severely limit the time ground stations have to send commands to ;md receive data from spacecraft. Consequently, the data rates employed for
these signals will depend on the amount of data to be transmitted during a pass. Most
missions need only small amounts of command data and housekeeping telemetry,
permitting low 'IT&C data rates, typically not more than a few kilobits per second
Usually, only a few seconds are needed to transmit commands. But we must often
dump stored mission data to a ground station at high rates to transfer all the data in the
available viewing time. Thus, limited ground station view times can create the most
severe requirements on the performance of the space-to-ground communications link.
We can understand this requirement for high data rates for dumped data by assuming that the example spacecraft produces and stores on-board mission data at a 1 Mbps
rate (a moderate rate for an Earth sensing spacecraft), for dump to the station once per
orbit The required rate for dumping data is the ratio of total stored data to available
dump time of 12.3 minutes:

Key Design CoDSideratioDS

IS.s

643

A dedicated ground system usually cannot have many symmetrically distnbuted
ground stations, but we can increase their number by using hybrid configurations of
various service-provided systems. In all cases, we must trade off the number- of
contacts needed with the spacecraft against the limited number of possible ground
stations and the severe geographical and political restraints on their location.
15.5.2 Number, Locations, and Variety or Data Users
The data users' requirements determine the complexity of distribution systems.
Data users frequently need different portions of spacecraft data streams with different
requirements for handling, so data ~dling ~ust be efficient and flexible. A typ~cal
approach is to sketch out the processmg functions needed to supply data to users m a
block diagram. The input to each diagram is the data stream from the data recovery
equipment We trace the data through each block, branch off the points where each
user's data is available, and indicate any further handling or processing. We also show
data rates at the input and output of each block. The final rate of the data stream to be
sent to each user determines the bandwidth of the communication link.
Figure 15-11 shows the processing which might be applied to data from a scientific
spacecraft. with data from the three onboard instruments combined into ~e data
stream for transmission to the ground. We assume that three data users eXist, each
receiving all of the data from a particular instrument and "quick look" data-particular words-from each of the other instruments' data streams. For each user, the figure
shows the data-handling functions and the rate at which the communication link must
send data. Once we have selected the appropriate block diagram, we can fill in details
at higher design levels.
MIssIon IlaIa

6

(l05minxlxl0 bps) = 8.54 x 106 bps
12.3 min

314kbps

(15-1)

This is a rather high data rate. For any shorter viewing time, the rate will be even
higher, requiring more performance of the space-to-ground link.
We can reduce this rate only by having enough stations symmetrically about the
Earth to ensure a total dump time of more than 12.3 min per orbit This would require
many stations. Having only a few stations also increases the amount of data which
must be stored on board, requiring more storage capacity to prevent loss of data from
overl1ow. And, as we have seen, more stored data requires even higher dump rates to
a limited number of ground stations.
Having only a few ground stations also significantly reduces spacecraft coverage
for 'IT&C and for receiving mission data transmitted in real time. Because the
amounts of data per pass are usually small, pass duration is not of much concern for
'IT&C. However, a mission's need for frequent 'IT&C contact, the lack of onboard
command storage (spacecraft autonomy), and the requirement to receive real-time
mission data typically demand more ground stations.

Tollala

u.er_
218kbps

I~H-F..==218kbps

Fig. 15-11. An Example of a Block Diagram for Data Handling. Composite data streams from
a spacecraft must often be separated and recombined for relay to different users.
The required communications Onk capacity may be seen explicitly. See text for

discussion.

The users' location and variety also determine whether the individual ground
stations or the central facility handles the data. Again, we must trade off the number,
bandwidth, and complexity of the required data links against costs for procuring and

644

Ground System Design and sizing

15.s

maintaining the handling equipment. For smaller ground systems, it is often best to
send data directly from the ground stations but in more complex systems, we usually
prefer to distribute data from the central facility.

Chapter 16

References

Spacecraft Computer Systems

Klements, H. D. 1987. Air Force Satellite Control Facility Space/Ground Interface.
TOR-0059(6110-01). El Segundo, CA: The Aerospace Corporation.
Martin, Donald H. 1984. Communications Satellites, 1958 to 1986. Report No.
SD-TR-85-76. El Segundo, CA: The Aerospace Corporation.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Goddard Space Flight Center. 1984.
Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) Users' Guide. STDN
No. 101.2.

Pratt, Timothy and Charles W. Bostian. 1986. Satellite Communications. New York:
John Wiley & Sons.
Sklar, Bernard. 1988. Digital Communications Fundamentals and Applications. New
Jersey: Prentice Hall.

L. Jane Hansen, HRP Systems
Robert W. Hosken, The Aerospace Corporation
Craig H. Pollock, TRW, Inc.
16.1 Computer System Specification

Requirements Definition; Processing Architecture;
Computer System Requirements; Baseline Definition
Expansion; Methods for Tolerating Faults
16.2 Computer Resource Estimation

Defining Processing Tasks; Estimating Software Size
and Throughput; Computer Selection Guidelines;
integration and Test; Life-Cycle Support
163 FrreSat Example

FireSat Attitude Control Processing; FireSat
Onboard Payload Processing; Spacecraft and
Payload Processing Consolidation and Effort
Estimation
Mission-supporting computer systems include the computers onboard the spacecraft, as well as those on the ground, as illustrated in Fig. 16-1. On board the
spacecraft, computers have become an integral part of the overall system, as well as
being part of most spacecraft subsystems. Ground station computer systems are used
to support daily operations after launch, and may be derived from systems originally
used for developing and testing space-based elements. Thus, computer systems cross
traditional subsystem and organizational boundaries.
In previous chapters we have described the various spacecraft subsystems. Through
spacecraft evolution, most subsystems now contain elements of a computer system as
shown in Fig. 16-2. This means that the computer system resource estimation process
takes on a larger scope than in the past. In this chapter we discuss how to generate
computer system resource estimates, refine the computer system requirements, estimate the effort in terms of resources, and define the tasks associated with developing
computer systems onboard the spacecraft. Additionally, we will briefly examine the
requirements for ground-based computer systems throughout the life-cycle development process.
As outlined in Table 16-1, we discuss the iterative process used to estimate
computer resources, based on mission requirements. We will accomplish this by first
discussing the computer system specifications and the task of creating a baseline
computer system from top level requirements. Figure 16-3 shows that the computer

645

----------------------

-------

Spacecraft Computer Systems

646

647
TABLE 16-1. Computer Systems Development Process. This iterative process defines toplevel requirements during a program's concept through development phases.
Antenna

Process Step

weEW.

Ground·
StaIIon
Processing
Center

~ !cs:~" I

• • Processor

I
OperatIons

Development

R9.16-1. Mission Computer Systems. Notice that there are many Interfaces and managing
their compatibility is critical to reducing cost and risk. Also, notice that the development tools and environment required to buDd, Integrate, and test the computer
hardware and software are Included as part of the mission computer system.

Power

Thermal
Control

Attitude
Control

Navigation
Solutions

Ch.ll.4

Ch.ll.5

Ch.ll.l

Ch.ll.7

.•

Command
and Data
Handling
Ch.ll.3

•

[I = Computer System Components
Rg.16-2. Computer Systems Break Trad/Uonal Subsystem Boundaries. Today computer
systems are an Integral part of nearly every subsystem on board the spacecraft. In
some cases, subsystems do not use computers If they are not required to meet
mission requirements. However, In most cases, the task of defining computer system
requirements and associated costs takes on a larger scope than In the past.

Where Discussed

Define Requlrsments
_ Evaluate MIssion Objectives
_ Perform Functional Partitioning

Chaps. 1,4, Secs.16.1.2,16.1.3
Chap. 4, Sec. 16.1.1

Allocate Top-Level Computer Requirements
_ Evaluate Candidate Architectures
- Perform Functional Row Analysis
_ Evaluate Fault Protection
- Establish System Baseline

Sec. 16.1.2
Sec. 16.1.2
Sec. 16.1.5
Sec. 16.1.4

Define Computer System Requirements
- Define Processing Tasks
- Establish Computer Size and Throughput Estimates
- Select Software Language
- Select Hardware Instruction Set Architecture
- Select Target Hardware and Supplier

Sec. 16.2.1
Sec. 16.2.2
Sec. 16.2.2
Sec. 16.2.3
Sec. 16.2.3

Define Development and Support Environment
- Establish Development and Control Process
-Identify Required Support Tools
- Establish Test and Integration Approach
- Estimate Life..Cycle Costs

Sees. 16.2.2, 16.2.5
Sees. 16.2.4, 16.2.5
Sec. 16.2.4
Sec. 16.2.5

Document and Iterate

Sec. 2.1

system baseline includes hardware. software. and documentation. Next. we will evaluate the resources required to achieve the baseline system. This includes hardware and
software. as well as life-cycle support equipment. Fmally. we will use the FueSat
example to clarify some of the key components and concepts of the estimation process.
Table 16-2 provides defmitions for terms frequently used in estimating computer
system resource requirements.
In designing computer systems for space applications. we want to optimize the
availability, capability. flexibility. and reliability of the system while minimizing cost
and risk. Our objective is to meet the system and mission requirements. whether the
resulting system is on the ground. in space. or distributed between the two. As mission
objectives expand, we must blend complex hardware and software to meet them. An
increase in system complexity leads to an exponential increase in the associated testing. We strive to keep the computer systems simple at the lowest level. while building
up the capabilities to meet the top-level mission requirements.
The primary design drivers used to measure our success in optimizing the computer
system design. are shown in Table 16-3. Mission requirements. shown on the left,
typically dictate the system-level drivers. shown in the next column. These flow down
to the subsystems where we establish driving requirements for computation. Final1y.
logistics support personnel set down the additional requirements which we feed back
against the computer and system-level drivers. helping to manage the overall design
process. We weight each of the design drivers based on mission objectives and constraints. Again. this iterative process requires multi-discipline participation and often
crosses traditional subsystem and organizational boundaries.

648

Spacecraft Computer Systems

Computer System Specification

16.1

649

TABLE 16-3. Design Drivers for Computer Systems. These are factors that we evaluate
throughout the design process. When flowing down mission requirements, includIng system level processing requirements, we must be careful to design hardware
and software with the "irlties# in the fourth column in mind.

,..-

Computer System

Mission
Requirements

o Functional Capabilities
Customer Needs
- Military
• Processing Partitioning
- Scientific
- Payload vs.
- Commercial
Spacecraft
- Onboard vs.
• Number of Satellites
Ground
- Single
- Multiple
• Physical
- Constellation
Characteristics
- Size
• Number and
- Weight
Location of
- Power
Ground Stations
- Temperature
• Level of Autonomy
- Radiation
• Security
• Command Protection I
Requirements
Encryption
• programmatic
Issues
-Cost
- Schedule
- Risk
o

Documentation

o

Hardware Configuration
Ilem(HWCI)

o Computer Board

Computer ChIp Set!
Anafog DevlcesllogIc
Components/Dlscrete
Components
o Data Bus

o

o

Computer Software
Configuration Items
(CSCls)

o

Computer Software

o

Computer Software Unit

o

Requirements Speclllcatlon
o DesIgn Documents
o DataHed Design Documents
o Intartace Control Documents
(ICDs)
o

Components (CSCs)

Fig. 16-3. Hierarchy of Elements In a Computer System. Computer systems consist of hardware, software, and their Interface definitions and documentation. Hardware and software components are In a hierarchy, building to the final configuration item--either
hardware or software. Documentation also has a hierarchy, but it starts with top-level
requirements and leads to increased implementation detail.

System Level
Processing
Requirements

Computer Level
Requirements
•
•
•
•
•

Throughput
Memory
Radiation Hardness
Development Tools
COTS Software
availability
• Emulatorl
Engineering Model
availability

Additional
Requirements
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Testability
Feasibility
Usability
Reliabiftty
Rexibility
MaintalnabDity
Interchangeability
Repiaceability

16.1 Computer System Specification
TABLE 16-2. Definitions Associated with Computer Systems. Often when discussing
computer system design and development we use terms which have a specific
meaning to those involved in the discipline.
Embedded Systems

A built-In processor, providing real-time control as a component
of a larger system, often with no direct user interface.

Rea/- Time Processing

Handling or processing information at the time events occur or
when the information is first created. TypicaDy, embedded or
onboard processing is real-time.

Hard Real-Time

Requiring precise timing to achieve their results, where missing
the time boundary has severe consequences. Examples include
attitude control software and telemetry downnnk. (For more
information see Stankovic and Ramamritham (1988].)

Soft Real-Time

Requiring only that the tasks are performed In a timely manner,
the consequences of missing a time boundary are often
degraded, but continuous, performance. Examples include orbit
control software and general status or housekeeping.

Operating System Software

Manages the computer's resources such as input/output
devices, memory, and scheduling of application software.

Chapter 4 discusses how to determine system requirements and allocate them to
subsystems. Through that process, we identify operational modes for the spacecraft
bus and payload, allocate top-level requirements to the computer system (among other
spacecraft elements), and define the subsystem interfaces. Defining requirements for
the computer system begins with these results. To arrive at a baseline computer
system, we:
1. Allocate mission and system requirements to computer systems, detailing the
computer system requirements
2. Define the computer system's operational modes and states, based on the computer system requirements
3. Functionally partition and allocate the computational requirements to space or
ground, payload or spacecraft, individual subsystems, and to hardware or
software
4. Evaluate the internal and external interfaces (analyze data flow), while evaluating the candidate architectmes iteratively
5. Select the baseline architecture
6. Form the baseline system specification from the architecture, modes and states,
and system level requirements

Application Software

M"lSSion specific software which does work required by the user
or the mission rather than in support of the computer.

The first four steps typically occur before the System Requirements Review. We
usually complete steps 5 and 6 by the Preliminary Design Review.

~~
;'.1

spacecraft Computer Systems

650

16.1

Revisiting and iterating between steps occurs frequently because requirements are
often contradictory, especially in the early design stages. Requirements can also be
unreasonable or too narrow in scope. For example, if we determine that the star tracker
must have a specified level of accuracy on its own to meet pointing or mapping
requirements, without synergy that might come from other ACS sensors such as Earth
sensor or gyro, we might overspecify the star tracker. By using an iterative process, We
can correct contradictory computer requirements and question the validity of others.
An assumption made by one subsystem to reduce their complexity may increase the
complexity and" cost for another subsystem dramatically. Often, a compromise
solution is needed.

16.1

Computer System Specification

651

we should consider having an off state to allow graceful degradation if the system were
to shut down for some reason. Other states relate to what the system must do and can
include related transitions. For a specific mission and mission requirements we might
have several substates in place of one state shown in Fig. 16-4. Or we might not have
a state shown in the figure if it's not applicable to our mission. For example, several "
fail-safe conditions will be associated with the error contingency state shown. However, it will be implemented differently for each specific spacecraft based on mission
requirements and mission phase.

16.1.1 Requirements Definition

As with all subsystems, poor computer system requirements definition results in an
inferior product; erroneous requirements are very expensive to correct. (See Kaner
et al. [1993] for more information.) Thus, requirements have high leverage-a small
improvement early avoids many problems later [Yick and Ramamoorthy, 1984;
Boehm, 1984]. Defining system requirements is difficult. subjective, and time
consuming. One approach to doing this is to study a set of questions, such as those
shown in Table 16-4, which will motivate needed trade studies.
TABLE 16-4. An Approach to System Requirements Definition. General questions which we
ask In all aspects of life can be dlrectly applied to computer system requirements
derivation by evaluating the specmc parameters listed below. (These questions
are based on work by R. Holmes, S. Jacobs, and R. Lane of TRW.)
~-

Questions to Ask

Paremeters to Review

What mUst the system do?

Evaluate and estabrlSh basic functional requirements.

Why must it be done?

Establish traceability from functions to mission objectives. Be
sure to challenge the requirements and assess their validity.

How can we achieve it and
what are the alternatives?

Evaluate candidate architectures and understand the
implications of Interfaces In the data flow dlagrams.

What functions can we allocate Perform functional partitioning to development block
to parts of the system?
dlagrams.
Are all functions technically
feasible?

Determine if the value of state-of-the-art technology outweighs
the risk. Look for data flow bottlenecks and reallocate
functions to evenly dlstribute the data flow. Review baseline
block diagrams for potential holes.

Is the system testable?

Develop nonintrusive testing which will ensure that the system
will meet mission objectives. Are test points available outside
the system for easy "black-box" testing?

To define requirements for a computer system, it is convenient to develop a
computer system state diagram. The state diagram shows valid states of the system
(such as "off' or "initialized") and the conditions required to achieve them, often
based on mission requirements. The computer system states and state transitions must
be consistent with its allocated requirements and the mission concept of operation.
(See Chap. 14.) Figure 16-4 is an example of a simple state diagram for a computer
system, showing the general states and the source of their transitions. On and off are
the obvious first choices for system states. Even when a system must be on at all times,

Fig. 16-4. Typical State Transition Diagram for an Onboard Computer System. The state
diagram shows the valid states of the system and the concfrtlons needed to achieve
each state.

When developing the state diagram for a spacecraft computer system, we must keep
in mind implications for the ground system. Complex state transitions influence
ground station software that deals with the spacecraft's limitations and constraints.
Other organizations which defme the spacecraft and the ground station need to help
diagram the states for the spacecraft computer system.
Functional Partitioning

Functional partitioning is a structured methodology which begins with decomposing requirements into their lowest functional component and ends in the creation
of multiple candidate architectures. This method allows us to group similar functions
in subsystem definitions without unnecessary influence from traditional subsystem or
organizational boundaries. The processing for a spacecraft system is usually
partitioned between various processors in space and on the ground. This allocation of
processing or functional partitioning is performed after the major processes have been
determined and estimates of the processing time lines, or at least the time dependencies, are available.
The "top-level considerations which determine where the processing will be
performed to meet the system performance requirements (both technical and programmatic) are presented in Table 16-5.
16.1.2 Processing Architecture
An architecture is a framework for developing a computer system. We mold it to
meet mission requirements and operational needs, creating a baseline system. The
architecture shows us the system's parts and how they interact through a block
diagram. Architecture studies for computer systems must address the top-level

652

Spacecraft Computer Systems

16.1

TABLE 16-5. Functional Partitioning Requirements for Spacecraft Computer Processing.
We partition functions in a general sense using mission tlmelines as the starting
point We must partition functions to various processors and subsystems so that
each element of the system maintains an acceptable level of complexity. A large
increase in the complexity of any element will greatly impact our test requirements.
Perform Processing on Ground

Perform Processing In Space
o
o

When prQCesslng delays would be
Intolerable
When needed to make downlink bandwidth
feasible (This case is treated for the FireSat
example In Sec. 16.3)

o
o

o

When very high performance Is needed
When well-defined, Inexpensive hardware
for the process is available

o
o
o
o

o

When payload proceSSing is distinctly
different from spacecraft bus processing
When payload performance accountability is
critical

o

o

When there are geographical or other
impedimenls to effective inter-organlzational
communication
When there are standard subsystems and
accurate Interface control documenls which
are typically managed within a defined
organization

We often refer to this architecture as a star.

When processing complexity exceeds that
available In hardware
When changes In processing need to be
made after hardware Is acquired
When expensive, custom hardware can be
replaced by software
When there Is considerable unused compUler
capacity

CONs

PROs
o

Works best with a few, well-defined systems
which all interlace directly, and only, with the
central computer.

o

Highly reliable architecture where failures
along one interface will not affect the other
interfaces.

When payload processing is minimal

0

o

To add a new node requires both hardware
and software changes in the central node.
Wiring harnesses become large because
each node has duplicate transmission wires
if data are sent to multiple receivers.

Do Not Allocate Processing Along
Organizational Unes

Allocate Processing Along
Organizational Unes
o

TABLE 16-6. Centralized Architecture. A Centralized Architecture has point-to-polnt interfaces
between processing units and a single management compUler, or central node,
or hub.

When human interaction with processing Is
necessary
When the downlink bandwidth Is satisfactory

Do Not Allocate Processing Between
Spacecraft Bus and Payloads

Allocete Processing Between
Spacecraft Bus and Payloads
o

sitive and negative attributes have been listed in the tables. By using a hybri~ system
:hitecture, we can com~ine the .positive .attribu~ of severa} of th~ architectures
while eliminating or reducmg the risk assocIated WIth the negative attributes.

Perform Processing In Software

Perform ProceSSing In Hardware
o

6S3

Computer System Specification

16.1

o

o

When the project is small enough that there
is a single organization with strong top-down
authority
When subsystems are so complex that
specific disciplines and experienced
organization personnel are required.

block diagram, the data architecture, the hardware architecture, and the software
architecture. Data architecture addresses the physical structure of the data network or
bus, as well as the protocol or logical interaction across the bus. A protocol is a set of
rules for sending data between computers, or between computers and peripherals. The
hardware architecture defmes the instruction set architecture (ISA) and the functional
elements that are available in hardware. (For more information on hardware architectures see Hennessy and Patterson [1995].) Finally, the software architecture defines
how the processing instructions execute. Software processing can function as a single
thread, executing from top to bottom. repetitively, or as scheduled modules, where
processing order is based on major and minor frames. Alternatively, software processing can be event driven, where interrupt service routines preempt normal execution in
a deterministic way when hardware interrupts occur.
Tables 16-6 through 16-9 illustrate various system level and data architectures
which we can use in their entirety or combine into a hybrid to meet the mission
requirements. Along with a block diagram and brief description of each, a short list of

TABLE 16-7. Ring Architecture (Distributed). The distributed ring architecture estabnshes a
way to arbitrate information flow control as the data are passed in a circular pattem.

Packets of data containing the same
information can be passed from a single
point (server) one time, and received by
multiple clients nearly simultaneously.

CONs

PROs
o

Wiring harnesses are smaller and can be
distributed throughout the spacecraft
structure,

o

Umited impact to central processor as we
add new nodes.

o

Less reUable since each node is In-Dne and

thus required to achieve transmission to the
next node.

654

Spacecraft Computer Systems

16.1

TABLE 16-8. Bus Architecture (Federated). A federated bus architecture uses a common data
bus with all processors sharing the bus. This encourages the use of standard
protocols and communication schemes for all nodes.

The bus architecture can be a "backplane" or
a coaxial cable. In a way this Is a hybrid of
the centralized and distributed architectures. .
Some bus systems use a command
response protocol with a single subsystem
in charge of communications.
(for example, MIL-STD-1553B)

16.1

Computer System Specification

655

We next analyze the flow of data to determine how to manage interfaces between
components. We want clean, simple interfaces-a data path is inefficient and slows
down the flow if it calls for data to pass through a component without being examined
or used [Yourdon, 1989].
After partitioning functions, performing trades, evaluating the data architectures,
and analyzing data flow, we can develop a block diagram fOr the computer system.
The system block diagram illustrates how we implement an architecture, showing
types and numbers ?f ~ and networks, including ~opology and J?TOtocol when
reasonable. It proVIdes a pomt of departure for developmg more detailed software,
hardware, and interface requirements. We select an architectural baseline from among
the candidates, shown in Table 16-6, by asking the questions listed in Fig. 16-5.

Some bus systems rely on traffic arbitration
mediated by the protocol itself.
(for example, TCPIIP)
No

PROs

CONs

• Data transmiSSions are deterministic which • All components must be developed with a
reduces test and trouble shooting time while
speclfic Interface-physically as well as
Increasing rellabmty.
electrically.

No
TABLE 16-9. Bus ArchHecture (DIstributed). A distributed architecture uses multiple "lIke"
processors to execute all software on an as-needed basis.

All software Is resident In the nonvolatile
memory. During various mission phases the
software components which are executing
may be different than those executing during
other mission phases. This system
architecture provides a high level of
redundancy.

No

No

The central processors may be used to
perform "data processing" functions for the
sensor front-ends and/or the actuator backends, as required.

i

I! :

No
A standard bus architecture and protocol
may be used as H1ustrated in the d1stnbuted
bus architecture.
PROs

• Highly reliable system because multiple
processing units can be used to execute
software as needed.

CONs
• More complex testing is required because the
system can reconfigure itself as software
modules are allocated to processing
resources.

EstabDsh BaselIne
Architecture

Rg.16-5. Questions Used In Selecting the Architectural Baseline. These questions, when
appned to the various architectures we are trading for a specific set of mission requirements, win lead us to an optimized architecture which effectively meets our specific
needs: Once each of these questions has been successfully answered, we have
selected a baseDne architecture.

I', ',

6S6

Spacecraft Computer Systems

16.l

To clarify the hardware and software architecture issues, consider the example of a
personal computer. Figure 16-6 shows the general components in the hardware
~hitecture diagram. It contains a central processing unit (CPU), memory, and
Input/Output (110) devices. The memory stores executable program code and data
Random access memory (RAM) does not retain information When we tum off the
co~puter. .Pr~gr~le read only memory (pROM) provides nonvolatile Storage
which retains information when not powered. In the simplest form, we input only from
a keyboard and output only to a monitor. More complex forms may connect many
input or output devices to the basic system.

MemoIY Han! Disk

E]
- ExecutIng
Program

Fig. 16-6.

-+ -Program
c::opy of
+- -Stored

Programs
- Stored Data

Personal Computer Architecture. The PC architecture shown here includes the varIous components discussed in the text. The inputs come from the keyboard or mouse
and can be service either through an interrupt service routine (ISR) or through a polling scheme. The processing occurs in the CPU and uses the RAM as a ·scratch pad"
for computation. (This formulation is due to S. Glaseman of The Aerospace Corp.)

A personal computer used as a word processor illustrates the different software
architectures which we might select, as well as the basic concepts for sizing computer
systems and estimating throughput The operator using the word processor will input
data from the keyboard. The computer system software might recognize that an input
has bee~ made by receiving an interrupt from the keyboard each time a key is stroked.
Altemati~ely, the computer system software might poll the keyboard at a specified
rate, lOOking for a keyboard stroke to occur. The first approach illustrates event driven
software architecture while the second is a scheduled software architecture. When
using an event driven approach, we must be sure that we prioritize each event properly
and def~e carefully the amount of time required to "service" the event or interrupt
When USIng a scheduled approach, we must be sure that the internal clock has enough
resolution to accommodate the various scheduled rates. If the clock is set or reset by
an external source, we must ensure that all software will continue to operate even with
discontinuities in the time (such as, if time moves backwards when the clock resets).
Now, assume an operator types at most 100 words (600 characters) per minute. We
can ~efine 256 unique s~tes ?n a ~ical keyboard, so a byte (8-bits) can represent all
posstble characters. Multiplymg 8 bits per character by 600 characters Per minute. we
see that the system must input data serially (single stream) at 4,800 bits per minute to
keep up with the keyboard operator.

16.1

Computer System Specification

657

Let's assume the computer system must prepare the input data for display. Also
assume that each character received will require 10 instructions for processing and that
each full word received will require 100 more computer instructions. We determine
the computer's required processing rate by first multiplying the number of characters
per minute by the computer instructions required per character. Then, we compute the
product of the number of computer instructions per word times the number of words
per minute. This example yields a processing rate of 16,000 instructions per minute,
or 267 instructions per second, to prepare the input data stream for display. Now
assume that each instruction requires five clock cycles to bring the data from memory
and one more clock cycle for execution. Thus, to keep up with the typist, the CPU must
provide at least 96,000 cycles per minute, or 1,600 cycles per second, requiring a clock
rate of 1.6 kHz. This example illustrates how we can estimate computer throughput
(instructions per second) and processor speed (cycles per second) requirements.
To store the input data and transfer the required 8-bit instructions to the CPU for
processing, the computer must transfer data from memory to the CPU at approximately 2,216 bits per second (80 bits per second for input data storage and 2,136 bits
per second for instruction fetch). We can size the memory by assuming the typist
works continuously for 24 hours at the top rate. The resulting data would require
6.9 million bits of storage, plus 880 bits for the 110 instructions. The keyboard
operator's typing rate limits the memory size requirements. Understanding such
system bottlenecks is one key to defining requirements for computer systems.

16.1.3 Computer System Requirements
Once we have identified the top-level requirements, the state diagram with state
transitions, and a basic system architecture we must evaluate the impact of mission
requirements on the baseline computer system. This assessment begins the refinement
process for establishing detailed computer system requirements. Information regarding the selected orbit, expected period of operation, and any high performance
requirements such as large field of view with continuous coverage or tight pointing
and mapping criteria will affect the fidelity of the hardware and software developed
for the specific mission.
Several mission parameters drive the hardware selection. For example, the orbit we
select will defme the radiation environment When we increase the required level of
fidelity or include a requirement for autonomous operations, we often require a more
capable computer system. Either of these conditions can develop if we have to perform
rapid transitions between differing orbits, or travel to distant targets. These requirements may impact software development. More complex requirements lead to more
complex software implementation, which requires a more robust design and more test
cases to accomplish a desired level of preflight validation. Inadequate requirements
definition may cause cost and schedule risk for both hardware and software, as
modifications and last minute changes may be required.
When the mission is not as critical or multiple copies of a satellite will perform the
same tasks, we can select computer hardware for the mission based on less stringent
environmental testing. Often we can use commercial rather than space-qualified parts.
Additionally, as the possibility for achieving unknown states goes down, we may
reduce the software complexity and the level of preflight testing. As we increase the
expected mission life or mission criticality, we should specify the use of more robust
hardware, specifically space-qualified components and systems. We also increase the
risk that software will operate in a manner that was not predetermined, and thus we
should do more thorough preflight testing and system validation.

658

Spacecraft Computer Systems

16.1

When we impose high performance requirements on the spacecraft computer
systems we also increase the performance requirements of both the hardware and the
software. High-data rate payloads such as imaging devices or communication
subsystems impose the need for higher bandwidth data busses and often increase the
CPU performance requirements. When we require tight attitude knowledge and
control, we not only impose a requirement for increased accuracy on the sensors, we .
also increase the computational complexity of the software. which in turn affects the
CPU performance requirements.
When we initially establish top-level mission requirements, we create a set of
baseline computer system requirements, state transition diagrams, data flow charts,
and system architectures. We can then perform trade-studies between the costs
associated with our mission requirements and the costs associated with the hardware
and software we selected to meet the mission requirements. Often when we iterate
between the two, compromising when we feel we can on either side, we can reduce the
overall mission costs.
16.1.4 Baseline Definition Expansion
If the initial analyses call for onboard processing, we should further partition
functions between hardware, software, and firmware. Firmware is the software which
resides permanently in nonvolatile memory. It reduces the susceptibility to upset, but
we cannot modify it after launch. Certain elements of the system are clearly hardware:
space-qualified computers and processors, the data bus, and so on. Software is for
processing algorithms. which may change throughout the spacecraft's lifetime. Software typically executes out of random access memory (RAM). However, because
RAM is susceptible to single-event upsets (Sec. 8.1.4), firmware is often the answer
for critical processes such as initiaIization or contingency operations. Fmnware ofteD
executes out of read only memory (ROM) or programmable ROM (PROM) where we
can write once or some smail number of times.
We next evaluate the Instruction Set Architecture, ISA. This is the machine code
format used by a specific processor, such as the 80><86 family of processors, 68040,
RH3000, and MIL-STD-1750A. The ISA defines the software developer's interface to
the processor at the lowest level. To evaluate hardware architectures, we examine
instruction sets, recognizing advantages and disadvantages of the two basic types:
general-purpose and custom ISA. The former supports all kinds of processing but with
only moderate performance. The latter supports specific algorithms or classes of
functions very well but often supports varying applications poorly.
We should avoid custom architectures whenever possible because they are risky to
develop, lack software support, and are hard to reprogram. General-purpose architectures allow us to modify algorithms more easily, but they slow down processing
because they are not designed for a specific algorithm. In special cases, the faster
speed of a custom ISA may drive us to select it despite the drawbacks.
In evaluating candidate software languages, we again have two basic options:
assembly language and higher-level language. Assembly language contains the basic
symbols and expressions used to program a specific computer, and the programmer
must thoroughly know the computer being programmed. Higher-level languages, such
as C, C++, or Ada, also have symbols and expressions, but they provide more sophisticated operations and add a level of abstraction. Assembly language software is more
efficient and compact than software written in a higher-level language, but it often
takes longer to generate. We prefer higher-level languages for maintenance, test-

Computer System Specification

16.1

659

ability, and life-cycle costs. However, cross-compilers are often not available for
custom machines, leaving assembly language as the only method of programming. A
cross-compiler is one which resides on a standard host (such as SUN, DEC, SOl) and
creates executable code for the target process (68040, 603e, and 1750A).
16.1.5 Methods for Tolerating Faults

Computer systems occasionally fail during operation. Since we know that this can
happen, we can attempt to mitigate the risk by implementing a means of achieving
graceful degradation, or fall backs to maintain some functionality. The most common·
are redundancy and distributed processing.
We use redundancy for flight critical components to assure that required data are
always available to the system. We can implement redundancy in several ways:
duplicate equipment, back-up capability using a different but comparable approach,
perform the same tasks on the spacecraft and on the ground, use a bus network which
allows for data to be sent to various applications or users, independently, or cross-strap
equipment to various potential users.
Distributed processing allows us to allocate software functions to anyone of a
number of processors, depending on either mission phase, hardware availability, or
subsystem failure. Each approach has pros and cons as outlined in Table 16-10.
TABLE 16-10.

Pros and Cons of Approaches for Providing Software Methods for ToleratIng Faults. There are many methods for tolerating faults and no one Is necessarily better than the next. However, when we evaluate our specffic requirements
against the pros and cons listed here, one solution may be more appropriate for
our mission. (For more information on fault tolerance, see Magnus [1992].)

~------

Redundancy

Distributed Processing

1--:---::----:-:---:---:-

PROs: Provides backup which Is Identical to PROs: Can reduce the system weight and
the original.
power if the number of systems Is
• Does not require additional or
optimized.
• Provides a means of maintaining
special software to process the data.
• Duplicate testing Is straightforward
system performance until several
failures have occurred. Then the
since the back-up Is Identical.
system wiD operate In a degraded
mode.
CONs: Additional weight, power and cost.
RequIres decision-making process to
determine which to use.

CONs: Requires adDItional software to
Implement distn"bution methodology.
Can be tricky to test and requires an
e~nsWenurrmerof~t~

Hardware or software errors, as well as environmental effects (see Chap. 8)
sometimes cause the computer to stop executing its intended program altogether or
perform instructions in an incorrect sequence. We can mitigate this problem by designing special circuitry so that the computer restarts when it is hung in this condition. We
can command this circuitry from the ground, or the computer subsystem can activate
automatically. In this latter case, we call the circuitry a watchdog timer. The timer
counts down from a given predetermined time and will reset the computer when it
reaches zero. To prevent the reset during normal operations, the computer's operating
system includes a function to reset the timer to its maximwn time on a regular basis.
The anomalous computer operation prevents this timer reset so the watchdog timer
restarts the computer. The decision to include a watchdog timer usually does not

Spacecraft Computer Systems

16.2

depend on a subsystem trade-off because we have inadequate data on the rates of
occurrence of this failure mechanism. It is often standard equipment on computers
designed and marketed for space operations.
Spacecraft occasionally have a more serious computer problem in which the fault
is pennanent and resetting does not solve the problem. The designer must determine
whether the reliability of the planned computer design is adequate, as discussed in
Sec. 19.2. If not, we will need to provide a redundant computer and the special circuitry needed to switch from the primary to the secondary computer on failure.
When we determine that memory may be unusually susceptible to failure, we can
mitigate risk by partitioning the memory into "blocks." We design memory to consist
of independent blocks, where the failure of one block does not cause the failure of
other blocks. In this case, the hardware designer may provide tolerance of failures of
a memory block by creating a physical-ta-logical map of the blocks at boot-up time.
If failures are detected during operations, the system can work around bad blocks of
memory. This is an example of a system architecture solution to a potential hardware
problem.
.
Another redundancy approach is to duplicate critical programs stored in nonvolatile
m~mory. For instance we often replicate the Start-Up ROM in physically isolated
sections of nonvolatile memory. If this logic cannot execute, the computer can not run
the operating system or the application programs. The rationale for providing this
second version of the start-up ROM is to avoid the effect of such a catastrophic failure
without including a second computer. Note that in this case, we need a hardware
mechanism, possibly controlled from the ground, to initiate the execution at the secondary location because the computer is not under software control until the start-up
program executes.
Error Detection and Correction (EDAC) circuitry is an example of hardware that
provides tolerance of a bit error in a memory word. It is particularly· important in the
mitigation of single event upsets. EDAC corrects a single bit error in a word when it
reads that word. If an upset has occurred, the EDAC will correct it If a long time
elapses before the CPU reads the word, a second bit in the same word may be upset
To prevent this from happening, the operating system executes a program known as a
scrubber to read each word of memory. As it reads each word, it "scrubs" all the single
bit errors. The design parameter available to the system engineer is the time between
scrubs. If the time is too long, uncorrectable second upsets in words are likely to occur.
If the time is too short, the scrubbing process will consume too much of the CPUs
processing time. We can determine this necessary scrub time based on the anticipated
rate of upsets and system probability requirement that a second, uncorrectable, upset
will not occur. Table 16-11 provides an example of this calculation.

16.2 Computer Resource Estimation
The previous sections discussed how we define computer system requirements and
generate a baseline architecture. In this section, we add detail to the baseline. With
functional groups and a system architecture in place, we specify the needed processing
tasks (in a general sense), determine the data requirements, estimate software size and
throughput requirements, and identify computer hardware on which it will execute.
We use traceability analysis to make sure the requirements are complete. We must
trace the computer system's requirements to parent requirements, which come from
various sources. For example, we may derive them from top-level requirements, oper-

16.2

Computer Resource Estimation

TABLE 16-11. Example of Calculating the Time,

661

To to Perform EDAC Memory Scrub.

Scrub Memory to Prevent Second Single Event Upset

Given:
• A single event upset (SEU) has occurred
• The affected memory word has 22 bits (16 data bits plus 6 check bits)
• We know the SEU rate Is 10-7 upsets per "bit day"
• We have a requirement that the probability of an uncorrectable second update Is less than
10-6 per day
• We assume a Poisson distribution for the bit errors
then let
A. arrival rate of new bit errors in word 21 x 10--7 upsets/day

=

=

and
Pnew= probability of one or more new upsets in word
=P1+ P2···+ P21
Pnew =1-Po =1- {A;)O 'e- A•T sA.T

Therefore:
10-6

T < - - - 7 '" 0.5 days
Or:

21·10-

ational concepts, or launch-vehicle interfaces. We must also trace the flow of
requirements to the components to reduce "gold-plating." Whenever a top-level
requirement changes, good traceability allows us to examine the effect of this change
on lower-level requirements and how we meet them. Often, we rethink a change when
we see its effects. In any case, traceability allows us to identify all areas where we must
evaluate the design to incorporate changes. If we flow the requirements properly during conceptual design, we can accurately run tests at each level during development
16.2.1 DefIning Processing Tasks

We document the requirements for processing tasks and system interfaces in Software Requirements SpecifIcations and Interface RequirementS Specifications. While
establishing requirements for the spacecraft, we defme processing tasks by classifying
what the spacecraft must do. Software for onboard processing falls into four principal
classes.
Control system software, such as attitude or orbit determination and control,
requires an input stimulus and responds by changing the state of the system. This
software is often mathematically intensive-requiring high accuracy and strict
timeliness.
System management software includes such items as fault detection and
correction, long duration event schedulers (such as reconfiguring the power
system during eclipses), and payload system management Software in this class
manages control flow and is therefore logic intensive. Simple instruction sets are
sufficient for this class because it requires few floating-point computations.
Mission-data software manipulates and compacts large quantities of data as they
are collected. This function often demands special computer architectures, such
as signal processors, as well as large storage capacity for collected data.

662

Spacecraft Computer Systems

16.2

Operating system software directly manages computer resources and controls
their allocation to spacecraft and mission tasks. This includes basic executive
functions such as scheduling tasks for execution, time management, interrupt
handlers, input/output device handlers and managing other peripheral drivers,
carrying out diagnostics and built-in tests, and memory fault management All
computer systems must manage these processes. We often consider software for
the operating system as overhead to application software.
After examining what the computer system must do, we can assess the nature of its
processors and decide whether to use off-the-shelf processors or develop new ones.
The same holds for the algorithms. We want to use established, proven algorithms
because new ones involve technical risk, added costs, and a longer implementation
schedule. Early emphasis on risk assessment and reduction is part of defining processingtasks.
16.2.2 Estimating Software Size and Throughput

We measure software size by words of memory, and processing time by throughput, usually expressed in thousands or millions of instructions per second (KIPS or
MIPS, respectively). We estimate the size and throughput of onboard software for
several reasons. When we begin defining a computer system, we use the software
estimates in conjunction with requirements for spare processing to determine how
much computing power we need to perform the mission. During system development,
we revise the estimates to make sure hardware capacity is not exceeded. We also use
software size estimates to estimate cost
Processor throughput is a function of the instruction set and the clock speed. With
only one instruction, a computer's throughput is proportional to clock speed. If it has
two instructions, one (A) requiring two clock cycles and the other (B) requiring seven
cycles, the computer's throughput also depends on the instruction mix. The instruction
mix is the proportion in which the software uses the instructions. For example, if the
software is 60% type A instructions and 40% type B, the throughput available with a
10 MHz clock is (101[(0.6 '" 2) + (0.4 '" 7)]) = 2.5 MIPS. If the mix is reversed, the
throughput available is 2.0 MIPs.
When we evaluate hardware architectures to determine their ability to meet our
processing needs we use a benchmark program that contains a specified instruction
mix so that various computers can be compared to a standard measure of performance.
Typical benchmarks used for evaluating computer resources in space applications are
shown in Table 16-12.
When We select a benchmark it is important that we use one that has a similar
instruction mix to the one we expect in our operational flight software. For example,
if our flight software will be mathematically intensive we could use Khornerstone,
Linpack, or Whetstone. However, if our flight software focuses on integer math, the
Dhrystone benchmark is a good match.
System Requirements Review is the milestone when we formally identify computer
resource requirements. A good rule of thumb is to set the amount of computer memory
and throughput at the System Requirements Review at four times the estimate of what
is needed for software size and throughput. Empirically, initial software size and
throughput estimates double from this review to launch because early requirements are
uncertain, and changes in software are easier to make than changes in hardware during
late stages of spacecraft development We also want spare memory and throughput at

16.2

Computer Resource Estimation

663

TABLE 16-12. Benchmark Programs Used to Evaluate Computer Performance. Usted

below is a set of benchmarks and their strength in measuring the performance of
a computer system [Beckert, 1993]. We use thase benchmarks to evaluate the
appncability of a specific computer to meet a specific software or mission obJective [Santoni, 1997}.

""-Benchmark

Measures

rahrystone

A test designed primanly to measure a CPU's integer performance. An
outcome of the Dhrystone test is the MIPS rating.

7{homerstone

A suite of 21 tests developed in 1987 by SRSlWorkstation Laboratories to
measure the overall performance of a computer's CPU, floating-poInt
capabilities, and disk VO.

unpack

This test measuras a CPU's floating-point ~rformance. Its results are
reported in mflops (millions of floating point operations per second).

MIPS

Millions of instructions per second. Refers to a CPU's ability to process Integer
operations. A Digital Equipment Corp. VAX 11 /78o-with its rating of one
MIP8-is often used as a standard.

~etstone

This test, written in Fortran and developed in the late 1960s at the NatIonal
Physical Laboratory in Whetstone, England, measures floating-point
performance. An optimized compiler can improve Whetstone performance,
thus making the test somewhat misleading.

launch to correct anomalies or to increase performance after system calibration. Thus,
we need to establish reserve capacity when initially defining requirements. A reasonable value for post-launch reserve is 100% spare (equivalent to 50% of machine
capacity).
We should not attempt to use all of the available memory or throughput Asynchronous processing, such as interrupt handlers, introduces a level of ~c~t>: in
throughput. Costs also rise dramatically as we shoe-horn the software mto eXISting
memory [Boehm, 1981]. As a rule of thumb, we should use 70% or less of available
throughput.
After System Requirements Review, we continuously update estimates for software size and throughput as requirements solidify. We plot them as reaction curves to
ensure we can detect whether the software is growing too much. Figure 16-7 shows a
typical reaction curve for software development, measured as a ~entage. of
maximum use. As long as the estimates fall below the curve, no extraordmary action
is required. When they exceed it, we must pare down the requirements, relax the
restriction on reserve capacity, or increase the resources available.

EstimotingResource Needs for Application Software
Table 16-13 lists general categories of application software and estimates for ~ize
and throughput. It contains typical sizes and throughputs for several types of appbcation software and is useful during conceptual design. Sizes for initial estimates are in
words of memory, which are less sensitive to language choice. Howev~r, cO$ting
models typically use source lines of code (SLOC). Table 16-14 shows typICal expansion ratios from words of memory to SLOC for various languages. Each of the
functions in Table 16-13 is discussed below in terms meant to allow sizing by similarity for satellite applications as discussed shortly in Table 16-16.
.
Communications software includes processing external commands andcoDecting
internal data for transmission to an external source. The information in Table 16-13

I

,

Spacecraft Computer Systems

100%

~~e;';"~ --

CD ~

reaction curve, action
o
must be taken to
!i -§,
correct situation

a
J~
~~

;

~

Required Spare

---~--\ ---------.:-=..=.-.::,-.=--=---, "

0.0

EE , '

8~

~

-1- ---- ----

..0-0-'

0'

~

~~o,..

""

Example of Typical Data

,-0

0'

SRR SDR SSR

PDR

CDR TAR Launch

16.2

SRR = System
Requirements
Review
SDR System Design
Review
SSR = Software
Specification
Review
PDR = Preliminary
Design Review
CDR = Critical Design
Review
TAR = Test Readiness
Review

=

DevelopmentTImellne
Rg.16-7. Reaction Curve for Using Computer Resources. Reaction curves mitigate risk.
They dlsclpfine our management of onboard computer resources. ·Whenever an estimate exceeds the reaction curve, we correct the situation.

assumes a modest number of ground commands (-100) and collection of data for
telemetry to the ground. It does not include inter-processor commanding, but we can
allow for this commanding by similarity of function.
Attitude-sensor software handles data from various sensors, compensates for sensor
misalignments and biases, and transforms data from sensor to internal coordinates.
Processing for gyros, accelerometers, Sun and Earth sensors, and magnetometers involves decoding and calibrating sensed data. Processing for star trackers involves
identifying stars against a star catalog, which can require extensive data and memory
resources. Mission-related or payload sensors typically require additional resources,
which we should calculate separately.
The Attitude Determination and Control category covers various control methods.
In kinematic integration, we estimate current attitude by integrating sensed body rates
using gyros. Using error determination, we find how far the spacecraft's orientation
is from that desired. For spin-stabilized spacecraft, we maintain attitude control using
precession control. The precession-control size and throughput numbers reflect those
of a thruster-based system. The thruster control function listed in the table is for a
three-axis-stabilized control system using thrusters. Table 16-13 also lists control
algorithms using reaction wheels, control moment gyros, and magnetic torquers. Also
in this category are object ephemerides, which We can maintain using crude table
look-ups and curve fits, or very complex algorithms. The orbit propagator integrates
the spacecraft's position and velocity information.
Table 16-13 covers two levels of autonomy. Simple autonomy is for a simple
system which requires little onboard support when not in contact with the ground··
stations. Systems will require complex processing if they need extensive management
of onboard autonomy.
Fault detection is closely tied with autonomy. Monitors exist to identify failures or
adverse conditions in onboard equipment. Size and throughput vary widely depending
on the system. Processing for corrective actions usually depends on tables of prestored procedures and, therefore, requires considerable data.

665

Computer Resource Estimation

16.2

TABLE 16-13. Size and Throughput EstImates for Common Onboard Applications. These
values are based on 16-bit words and a 1750A-c1ass Instruction Set Architecture
and assume that software is developed In a hlgher-order language. Because the
1750A is a general-purpose processor, these numbers represent a good first
estimate tor other general-purpose ISAs. When estimating throughput by similarity, we should hold constant the ratio of throughput to execution frequency given
In the table. Increased complexity will Increase required size and throughput

(KIPS)

Typical execution
Frequency
(Hz)

4.0
2.5

7.0
3.0

10.0
10.0

0.8
0.5
1.5
02
2.0

0.5
0.1
0.8
0.1
15.0

9.0
1.0
12.0
1.0
2.0

10.0
1.0
10.0
2.0
0.01

Attitude Determination & Controf
KInematic Integration
Error Determination
Precession Control
Magnetic Control
Thruster Control
Reaction Wheel Control
CMG Control
Ephemeris Propagation
Complex Ephemeris
Orbit Propagation

2.0
1.0
3.3
1.0
0.6
1.0
1.5
2.0
3.5
13.0

0.2
0.1
1.5
02
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.3
2.5
4.0

15.0
12.0
30.0
1.0
1.2
5.0
15.0
2.0
4.0
20.0

10.0
10.0
10.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
10.0
1.0
0.5
1.0

Autonomy
Simple Autonomy
Complex Autonomy

2.0
15.0

1.0
10.0

1.0
20.0

1.0
10.0

Fault Detection
Monitors
Fault Correction

4.0
2.0

1.0
10.0

15.0
5.0

5.0
5.0

Other Functions
Power Management
Thermal Control
Kalman Filter

12
0.8
8.0

0.5
1.5
1.0

5.0
3.0
80.0

1.0
0.1
0.01

SIze (Kwords1
Code

Data

Communications
Command Processing
Telemetry Processing

1.0
1.0

Attitude Sensor Processing
Rate Gyro
Sun Sensor
Earth Sensor
Magnetometer
Star Tracker

Function

Typical
Throughp~

• Notation here Is both standardized and awkward. A lower case "k" Is the metric prefix for 1,000; for
example, a frequency of 5,000 Hz =5 kHz. An upper case "I{" In counting memory is used for 210 =
1,024. Thus, 2 K words of memory =2,048 words = 2,048 x 16 bits =32,768 bits = 32 Kblts.

Power management and thermal control are support functions that often reside in
onboard. computers. Through power management, the computer controls battery
charge and discharge and monitors the power bus. Active thermal control involves
monitoring and controlling temperatures throughout the spacecraft.

I,

! ,

666

Spacecraft Computer Systems

16.2

16.2

Computer Resource Fstimation

667

,I
TABLE 16-14. ConverUng from Source Unes of Code (SlOC) to Words of Memory. Software written in a hJgh-order language Is converted to assembly-level Instructions
by tools called compRers. The compliers usually offer optimization options: for
minimum memory use, or for fast operation. The average number of instructions
per SlOC Is a function of this optimization. Single values are provided hare for
several common hlgh-order languages. However, based on compHer optimization and designer style these values may shift as much as 25%. Some Information was extracted from Boehm [1981]. Modem computers average about 1.5
words of memory per assembly instruct/on.
Language
Fortran
C

Assembly Instructions
perSlOC

6
7
6
4
5

Pascal
Jovial

Ada

Bytes per SlOC
for 32-bJt Processor
36

42
36

24

30

Estimating Resource Needs for Operoting-System Functions
When sizing the operating system software, we can use the numbers in Table 16-15
as baselines or averages. Because systems may require each component to do more or
less than indicated, we must apply these numbers flexibly. (For more information on
operating systems, see Lane and Mooney [1988] or Silberschatz and Galvin [1997].)
For many hardware ISAs commercial operating systems are available and may be used
in their entirety to reduce risk. However, this may add substantial memory requirements and increase the level of throughput required unnecessarily. The executive is the
code that manages and schedules the application software and other operating-system
functions. The executive provides interrupt services, schedules and manages tasks
based on timers or interrupts, manages resources and memory, corrects single-event
upsets, and detects memory faults. It also dynamically allocates memory and fault
detection interfaces to the applications.
TABLE 16-15. SIze and Throughput EstImates for Typical Onboard Operating System
Software. The values below are based on 16-blt words and a 1750A-class ISA.
Because the 1750A Is a general-purpose processor, these nulhbers reprasent a
good first estimate for other general-purpose ISAs. Operating-system overhead
Increases with added task schedunng and increasing message traffic.

,.I

Size (Kwords)

I

Code

Data

Throughput
(KIPS)

Executive

3.5

2.0

0.3n

n Is the number of tasks scheduled
per second.
Typical: n 200

Run-Time Kernel

8.0

4.0

see

Throughput Is Included In functions
which use the features

VO Device

2.0

0.7

O.05m

Bunt-In Test and
Diagnostics

0.7

0.4

0.5

Throughput est/mated assuming
0.1 Hz

Math UtIlities

12

02

see

Throughput Is Included in estimate
of application throughput

,I

Function

Comments

=

comments
Handlers

comments

m Is the number of data words
handled per second

Run-time kernel software normally supports higher-order languages. For example,
·t may represent, store, optimize, and pack data; drive input or output; .handle
~xceptions or errors; and interact or interface with other programs, other deVICes, or
yen other mixed-language programs. The 1/0 handler controls data movement to and
:rom the processor, as well as packing data for any ~pecific interface. Likewise, the
device handler or device driver software manages mterfaces and data between the
processor and any peripheral devices.
.
Utilities are software routines which several functions use. For example, different
components of application software in a single processor might access a set of mathematical operations called math utilities. Their size and complexity vary ~tly with
the application and its mathematical requirements. If the proc~or prOVides such
utilities, they are referred to as built-in junctions, ~ is the ~ In the MIL-STD1750A ISA. Hardware specifications define these available functions.
Built-in test software provides initial, periodic, or continuous testing for computer
elements under the control of software or firmware. Diagnostic software not only
Identifies faults or failures but also isolates them. We can make it sophisticated
enough to recover from some of them. For built-in testing and diagnostics, we can
write the software as firmware. The computer vendor may even supply them. If not,
we would have to decide whether we need this added reliability, despite the processing
and cost overhead.
For preliminary mission design, we recommend the estimation-by-simiIarity
approach given in Table 16-16 to estimate the size and throughput for embedded software in an onboard computer, as well as its size. Another approach, bottoms-up
estimation, is also discussed in Table 16-16. Both methods are demonstrated in
Sec. 16.3, the FireSat example. For alternative approaches, see Rullo [1980].
16.2.3 Computer Selection Guidelines

Once the initial software size estimation process has been completed, we can begin
identifying the hardware resources required. We must fmd .a computer system w~ich
meets all of our basic needs, as well as the spare allocation, and has the required
support environment Each computer considered must have suitable system software
(operating system or kernel and built-in functions such as mathematics).
Representative space computers are shown in Table 16-17. In almost all cases
space computers should be purch~ ra~er than deve!oped to avoid ~aying the
nonrecurring development costs, and mcurnng schedule nsks. The exceptions are on
opposite extremes. Large aerospace ~orpora~o~ have all ~e res~~es.required to
design and test a computer for a spectal application. Educational Institutions, on the
other hand, may make the same choice, not to save money, but because the process
meets an educational objective and because reliability requirements are not stringent.
Such an institution should verify the onsite availability of the hardware development
.
environment, particularly a logic analyzer with the ~uired pods. .
The frrst performance criterion we can evaluate .IS the computati?n ~te m !dlPS.
With Reduced Instruction Set Computer (RISC) this throughput rating IS eqwvaIent
to 1.5 instructions times the clock cycle, typically expressed in MHz. The processor
selected must meet the resource estimation we calculated based on the software
functions required to meet the mission objectives. Nearly as important as the
computational rate is the address space available. Each hardware address line can have
two values: a one or a zero. Therefore, N address lines provide 2N distinct addresses.

6fi8

Spacecraft Computer Systems

16.2

TABLE 16-16, Software EstImation Process. The esttinatlon-by-s1mnarity technique uses
exfsting, well characterized functions and their relationship to functions under
development to estimate processor memory and throughput needs for the new
functions. The bottoms-up estimation process forces the estimator to break the
functions Into the smallest components, which are then evalueted based on
experience.
Step

Notes

1. Ust all application functions allocated to the
given computer.

Document any IISSIJmptions.

2. Break down the functions from step 1 Into basic ThIs often requfres several Iterative steps. We
elements.
should continue to break down the functions until
we heve reached the lowest level we can Identify.
3. Define the real-time execution frequency for
each of the basic elements.

We only need to perform this ste~for those
functions which are time critical. ecution
frequency Is not required for utDlty functions.

4. Estimate the source Ones of code ~LOC) and
memory needed for each function y:
A. slmn:rAnd a function from Table 16-13
with simi processing characteristics and
known size. Co:c::re the complexity of the
known function
the new one and adjust
the code size directly. Adjust the code
estimate for differences In development
language, such as assembly versus higher
order lenguage. Use Table 16-14 to
determine the SLOC from the memory used.

Simllarlty-Requires k)'Iowledge of both the
existing functions and the new functions in terms of
specific requirements, complexity, and general
implementation. Some rules of thumb are:
• A 25% increase In complexity Implies a 25%
Increase in code
• If the known function Is In assembly code,
Increase the code size by 250/0 for a higher order
lenguage.
• If the known function is In a higher order
language, decrease the code size by 20% for
assembly code.

B. BotIoms-Up: Identify the SLOC for
Bottoms-U~equires knowledge of general
executable elements of the lowest level
elements of each function and how to Implement
functions as weD as the data structures and the capabiUty.
one time only initlaDzation software. Sum the
SLOC for all executable and nonexecutable
functions separately. Use Table 16-14 to
determine the memory requirements, based
onSLOC.
5. Estimate throughpui requirements based on:
Throughpul should be expressed as Instructions
A. slmn= And a function from Table 16-13 per second.
with simi ar processing characterlstlcs and
known throughpul requiremants. Campara
the complexity of the known function with the
new one and adjust the throughput value for
differences In comp
directly. Based on
the frequency of ex
n from step 3
above, compute the total throughpul
requiremants for the new function.

=

B.BoHoms-Up:Basedonanavaragenumber
of computer instructions executed per SLOC
for a specific compiler and processor,
m : the number of instructions the
ex
on frequency. Define a "Ioorr etor"
for executable SLOe to represent ntemal
loops within the function.

:t

The intemal loop factor for an ACS function
associated with a three axis stabUized spacecraft
wUI be 3- each function wUI be repeated for each
axis. In order to estimate throughput from SLOC,
the Ones of code related to Initialization and data
must be separated from the executable Ones of
code. The loop factor Is appUed only to the
executable SLOC

6. Determine the operating syalem and overhead You must Identify all application code prtor to this
requirements by sJmDarJtY to other
step. Complexity for opera~m functions Is
Implementations. Compara the complexity of
based on number of tasks
led per second,
the known operating syaIem and overhead
the number of interrupts to be handled, and the
functions to the new and adjust accordingly.
emount of VO data.
7. Determine the margins for growth and on-orbit
spare based on where you are in the
development cycle and Ag. 16-7.

Growth and spara requirements are Important and
should be strfctIy calciulated.

Computer Resource Estimation

16.2
TABLE 16-17.

669

Commercially Available Space Computers. These computers have been
developed for use in a variety of general purpose spece applications.
Perlormance

Radiation Connect-

(MIPS)

Hardness

IvIty

16MB'

lto3

1 MRad

32

4GB

10to20

1 MRad

603E

32

4GB

20

100KRad

1750A

16

16MB"

1to2

1 MRad

10

Rad Hard

1553B
RS-232
RS-422
1553B
AS-232
RS-422
RS-232
RS-422
1553B
RS-232
IEEE-488
1553B
RS-422
PCI
Firewlre
HSS
1553B
RS-422
Parallel
RS-422
Parallel
RS-422
1553B

suppUer
and
Computer
D
Hon&rc
G C

ISA
1750A

Ho~~eu

R3000

Hone~eD
RHPC
L-M
GVSC

Word

Memory

Length

~M)

(bits)
16

Heritage

NEAR, ChinaStar.
Clementine
GPSII
SBIRSHlgh
VilAS
Casslni, Rapid I

L·M
RAD3000
L·M
RAD6000

R3000

32

16MB

RS6000

32

16GB

TRW

RS-3000

32

16MB

10

Rad Hard

8OC186
SWRI
SC-2A
8OC386
SWRI
SC-5
TI320C30
SWRI
5C-7
1750A
SWRI
5C-1750A
RS6000
SWAI
SC-9
R6000
SWAI
MOPS

16

766KB

0.3

10KRad

32

320KB

0.6

10 KRad

32

640KW

12

100KRad

16

512KB

1

32

128MB

20

10KRad RS-422
1553B
30KRad RS-232

MSTI-1,2.3
New Millennium DS-l
Space Station

32

128MB

25

30KRad RS-422

R3000

32

4MB

10

50KRad

Gravity Probe B,
Intemational ~ace
Station Alpha ISSA)
CRSS

603E
80186

32
16

2GB
512KB

25
0.5

Rad Hard 1553B
RadHard 1553B
RS-422

Sanders
STAR·RH
GDAISISE
AcerSertek

• Address Space

10 to 20 100KRad

L·M: Lockheed Martin

1553B

LM·900
Mars Pathfinder, Globalstar, Space Station,
SBIRS Low, Mars 98
SSTI, T200b. Step-E
MSTI-2
RADARSAT, SNOE
MSTI-3

HEAO,AFAX
ROCSAT

SWRt: Southwest Research Instltuie

For example, a computer with 16 bit words would generally have a 64K word
address space and a 32 bit word computer could address a 4 Gigaword address space.
However, this may require a more in-depth examination. The Generic VHSIC
Spaceborne Computer (GVSC) was developed by the Air Force from the MIL-SID
1750A, which defines one word as 16 bits, but it has an 8 Mword address space. This
was achieved by built-in paging hardware. The GVSC is a special case because the Air
Force developed it especially for space applications. We may find other exceptions
as well.
H possible each candidate computer, or its engineering development unit equivalent, should be bench-marked against the relevant applications. This is rarely done
because of time and lack of availability of the hardware. In the absence of real equipment or software benchmarks, the computer analyst should examine the individual
instructions of each candidate and match them against the qualitative aspects of the
computational requirements. For example, the processor we select to support the
attitude determination and control function will perform many floating point and
transcendental function computations. In this case it would be desirable for floating
point and trigonometric instructions to be performed in hardware and not in software.

670

Spacecraft Computer Systems

16.2

If the processor is to perform commutation or multiplexing at the bit level, the CPU
should have instructions that support such processes.
On the other hand, the processor we select for control and data handling will need
to support bulk moves of data. Thus it would be desirable if it had a Direct Memory
Access (DMA) command or a block move command. DMA is very valuable for data
handling processors with extensive I/O so that the range of data to be moved can be
specified and letting the DMA hardware relieve the CPU of moving each word.
If we determine that several computers can meet the performance needs we outlined
in the. sOftv:'ar: resource estimation process, a computer's heritage can be a major
selection cntenon. We often select a computer previously used in space by NASA,
ESA, the DoD, or a major commercial space venture. By starting with computers
which have prior use in space, the major development, qualification testing, and
doc:umentation risks and costs will have been borne by the prior programs. However,
whIle older space computers are often highly reliable, they are typically more expensive and less capable.

16.2.4 Integration and Test
As Fig. 16-8 shows, testing usually begins at the lowest level and builds incrementally. By buil~g our test scenarios from the bottom up, we can reduce the complexity
and thus the nsk. Testing must be rigorous at aU stages from the unit level to the system
level (Kaner et al. [1993)). Software and hardware testing follow the same general
path, with the subsystem resulting when we integrate the hardware and software. At
~s level, we test the entire computer system. Finally, we test the whole spacecraft,
With computer systems becoming components of the subsystem as described in
Chap. 12. Unfortunately, we cannot determine whether we have calibrated the
computer equipment properly until it is in orbit. Once operational, the system needs
general testing to ensure it continues to perform as required. Just as acceptance test
procedures or inspections check systems for damage on delivery, retesting on-orbit
checks for damage during launch. This testing is often referred to as on-orbit checkout and calibration.
In general, integration and test pulls disciplines and subsystems into a configuration
that meets top-level, system requirements. In this sense, as Chap. 12 suggests, integration and test is much the same as systems engineering. Testing includes all activities
that increase confidence in the system's performance. It ensures that we have met requirements and that anything happening beyond these requirements does no harm to
the system, while preserving specified functions. Testing for these "extras" is the most
difficult because we do not always know what we are looking for. Testing, especially
for the software-intensive computer resources associated with space systems, is a complex undertaking. It can consume up to half of the development cost and a significant
percentage of support costs over the life-cycle.
16.2.5 Life-Cycle Support
Many issues associated with the development cycle affect conceptual design and
long-term life-cycle costs. For example, we select hardware and software design
concepts d~g requirements definition but we draw on implementation and development eXperience to do so. Because we often have to cost activities for developing a
computer system before a complete design is available, we must take into account the
many aspects of software and hardware development, testing, and integration. Softw~e-based tools and standards such as MIL-STD-498, IEEE and SAB Specification
Gwde. and ANSI standards help us structure our methods and give us more manage-

671

Computer Resource Estimation

16.2

Software Verification

Hardware Verlllcallon

I I
" I~ I

ICom~1

UnftTest

" 1==&1
Test

"

IAcce,cnceI/

I~~nel /
Test

GrouJld.Based
Space-Basedand /
Systems

I~I

+

Rg. 16-8. Levels of Testing. Testing builds Incrementally as the product develops from component to system. It begins at the lowest level building up Into system and mission requirements verification as the elements are Integrated.

ment and technical controls. The Software Engineering Institute (SEI) has established
a rating system for the software development process. Companies can apply to SEI for
increasing levels of performance ratings [Humphrey, 1995}. Also, the International
Standards Organization has established a process-based rating known as ISO 9000.
In addition to the development process, long-term issues such as life-cycle costs
require attention during conceptual design. The complete life-cycle costs include
conceptual design, detailed design, implementation, system integration. test, and
on orbit maintenance-plus the tools associated with each phase. There are many software development life-cycle models which we can use. However, these continually
evolve to reflect the current state of the software development environment According to Anderson and Dorfman [1991], "As the software development process evolves,
so will these models to reflect new types of applications, tools, and design paradigms."
Our experience has been that development support software will require 8 to 10 times
as many lines of code as the flight software. We can use this to estimate the cost of the
development software as discussed in Sec. 20.3.2. The cost estimate we generate using
this method can be applied to either the development of support software or to procure
COTS tools as discussed below. Table 16-18 summarizes the various life-cycle issues
which we must address during the early phases of program development
Building an operational system depends on the development philosophy and
environment we select Procuring commercial off-tke-shelf (COTS) hardware and
software is the easiest way we can build a capability. However, off-the-shelf items
often don't meet our needs exactly. Thus, we must tailor the COTS products or adjust
the need to match what is available. The break-even point is different for each program
depending on the number and types of requirements, personal skills, our knowledge of
tl1e product, and whether the COTS products are maintainable and of high quality. If
we opt for custom development, we must also consider the development and test tools

Spacecraft Computer Systems

672

16.2

TABLE 16-18. Summary of L1fe-Cycle Cost Issues. Through the use of development and
protocol standards, auto-code generation, and re-use of common software and
hardware modules, as wen as Increasingly capable development tools we create
a means of contronlng and streamlining the costs associated with computer
system development (For additional Information, see Boehm [1984}.)
Standards
DoD-STD-2167
o IEEE
-ANSI
o SAE
o

Example

o
o
o
o

o
o

Benefits

o
o

Notes

Automation and Re-Use
Commercial Off-the
Shelf (COTS) Software
o Computer Aided
Software Englneerfng
(CASE)
o Automated Code
Generation

Development Tools
CompHer, Assembler, and
Unker
o Cross CompHer
o Loader and Debugger
o Code Analyzers and
ISO
Optimizers
MIL-Specmcation
o Test Case Generator
Structured Development
o Code Management
Object Oriented
Software
Development
o Simulators and Emulators
Adds structure to
o Reduces development
o Allows for more generic
development activities
time which implies lower software to be developed
costs
and then compiled speclfiStandardizes
cally for target hardware
documentation between
and among programs
o Aids In configuration
management
o Simulation and emulation
increase effiCiency and
effectiveness of testing
Tailoring is critical
• Need documentation
o Be sure that a
which accurately reflects development environment
Must balance required
the Implementation
is available for the
amount of documentahardware selected for the
o MUST continue to test at
tion with associated
project
the same level for all
costs
sources of software
o

o

we will need to create the operational unit. We may need special hardware, software,
or integrated systems. For single-unit or unique systems, developing support tools can
cost as much as developing the operational units. We must evaluate these support tools
during conceptual design, and include their cost in the overall development cost. As
with the cost of other developmental tools, we may be able to amortize these costs over
mUltiple products or projects.
When developing embedded flight software we must first determine if we want it
in assembly language or a higher order language. If we have selected a higher order
language, we must decide which tools to use. Depending on the target processor ISA
and the language selected, we must evaluate the availability and quality of crosscompilers, linkers, assemblers, and the host processors on which they reside. A host
machine is the computer where the development activity is to take place. The target
machine is the embedded microprocessor or ground-based computer where the code
will perform throughout its lifetime. A cross-compiler executes on the host, compiling
software for the target processor. For both assembly language and higher order
languages, the loaders and debuggers allow us to store software in the target processor
and evaluate its performance based on either symbolic or physical information.
Sometimes the host computer and the target computer have the same ISA. In this case
the compiler is not the issue but library and other functions' availability on the target
should be explored.

16.3

FireSat Example

673

16.3 FireSat Example
The FrreSat example can help us better understand the process of estimating
computer resources. We show two examples of software estimation: one for the spacecraft attitude control capability, the other for payload control and data management.
16.3.1 FireSat Attitude Control Processing
To begin the estimation process, we need a list of allocated computer system
capabilities. For this attitude control example, we assume that the spacecraft is a ~
axis-stabilized vehicle using an Earth sensor, a Sun sensor, and rate gyros for sensmg
vehicle attitude and attitude rates. Reaction-control thrusters generate the control
torques. Further, we assume that the highest frequency the system performs any
function is 4 Hz (every 025 sec).
From this information we can decide what the system must do. For example, it must
process data from the Earth ~nsors, Sun sensors, and ~te 8Yf?s: To ~ess the data
and determine the current attitude, we need to perform kinematic mtegration, or something equally complex. To maintain the desired attituru:' we n~ functions f~
determining attitude error and for thruster control. A function to estimate ephemens
allows us to keep track of orbital position. If the ground station regularly updates the
ephemeris, we need only a si~ple funct;ion to propaga~e it. Remember t~ ide~tify all
assumptions whenever you estimate; this last assumption allocates functionality to a
. . .
supporting ground station.
We can now estimate the memory and throughput requrrements for the application
functions. Assuming a 1750A-c1ass host processor, apply the information in
Table 16-13 directly to estimate memory for code and data. When using ~ tabl~, if
your particular function is estimated to be much larger or smaller than what IS typical,
adjust the numbers accordingly. Estimating throughput requires ~ore effort. To ~
the throughput numbers in Table 16-13, we must first estabhsh the execution
frequency for the attitude control computations. Table 16-19 lists the ass~ed
frequency for each application function. We estimate the ~oughput for a ~cti~n
executed at 4 Hz by using 4 HzJlO Hz = 40% of the values 1D Table 16-13, which IS
based on a 100Hz execution rate. Table 16-19 shows the estimated memory and
throughput requirements by function.
We need to consider an operating system to complete the estimate for all the
software in the attitude determination and control computer. We have assumed the
software is in Ada· thus we will need a run-time kernel. A COTS Ada cross-compiIer
may include a k~el. We must also have a local executive to perform task scheduling
and management. The number of scheduled tasks per second depends on the number
of application functions and their execution rate. For this example, we estimate 80
tasks per second. Because of the four sensors being serviced and the connection with
the data bus, we will need frve data handlers. To estimate how much data the system
must handle, first determine how much the sensors produce and how often they
transmit. Then add external commanding and telemetry requests. For this example, the
handlers will control the flow of 800 data words per second. The last functions to
estimate are the built-in test and associated diagnostics. We determine memory and
throughput for each operating-system function from Table 16-13, taking into account
the assumptions above.
We have estimated memory and throughput requirements for all functions that the
computer must support for attitude determination and control. But because early

674

Spacecraft Computer Systems

TABLE 16-19.

16.3

16.3

FireSat Example

675

Estimating Size and Throughput for F1reSat Attitude Control Software. We

can use this general format for estimating the size and throughput requirements
for any software application, based on the method of slmHarity. First list the
anticipated appRcations functions. Using the mission requirements we can
establish a baseline frequency for the execution of each function. Th~n, based
on either the estimation by similarity or by bottoms·up estimation, we determine
the mamory requirements for each function. Finally, using the estimation process
and the estimated frequency of execution, we can determine the required
throughput for each function. Notes for this table are on the follOwing page.
Required Memory

Component

EstImation Source

Required

Code

Data
Throughput
(Kwotds) (Kwords)
(KIPS)

NoleS:
1. eomputation of n = number of scheduled tasks per second.
To determine n, first calculate the number of application functions times their frequency
5 functions Ils1ed at 4 Hz 20 functions per second
2 functions Ils1ed at 1 Hz = 2 functions per second
Total =22 functions per second

=

If no batter Information exists, assume 3 to 4 scheduIable tasks for each major function. Thus, a conservative
estimate for the number of schedulable tasks, n, in the RreSat ACS example would be 80.

2. eomputa1ion of m = wordsls
Rate gyros-12 @ 4 Hz, Earth sensors-20@ 8 Hz, Sun sensors-l0
Telemetry- 4 kbh telemetry stream
eomrnand--OOntro/ commands

@

4 Hz

=
=
=
Total e

248 words per second
500 words per second
50 words per second
798 words per second

Frequency

Application Functions

(Hz)

Thruster Control

Table 16-13

4

0.6

Rate Gyros

Table 16-13

4

Earth Sensor

Table 16-13

4

Sun Sensor

Table 16-13

Kinematic Integration

0.4

2.4

0.8

0.5

3.6

1.5

0.8

4.8

1

0.5

0.1

1.0

Table 16-13

4

2.0

0.2

6.0

Error Determination

Table 16-13

4

1.0

0.1

4.8

Ephemeris Propagation

Table 16-13

1

2.0

0.3

2.0

6.4

2.4

24.6
24.0

(a) Appl. Subtotal
Operating System
Local ExecutiVe

Table 16-15, with n=60 (1)

3.5

2.0

Runtime Kemel (COTS)

Table 16-15

8.0

4.0

NlA

VO Handlers (5)

Table 16-15, with m= 800 (2)

10.0

3.5

40.0

BIT and Diagnostics

Table 16-15

0.7

0.4

0.5

Ulllit1es

Table 16-15

1.2

0.2

NlA

(b) Subtotal: COTS

(e) Subtotal: Non-CQTS

8.0

4.0

NlA

15.4

6.1

64.5

requirements are soft and the system will evolve, we must add substantial margin. The
target computer in which this software resides must also have spare capacity to accommodate on-orbit growth in the software. Table 16-21 includes the margin we need. In
this example, the ACS computer's minimum size and throughput are 155 K words and
356 KIPS.
To assess cost and develop a schedule, we need to estimate the number of source
lines of code, or SLOC. This estimate should consider only the software that we must
develop, so we exclude margins and off-tile-shelf software. (The margin added for
growth between the System Requirements Review and deployment is to reduce risk in
determining processor requirements. Although not included in the calculation of
somce lines of code, we should consider it when we examine potential cost and schedule risk.) The amount of software to be developed is 23.8 K words of code and 8.5 K
words of data memory. For costing, we use a factor of 25% to convert data memory to
equivalent code words. We have to do so because developing a data word takes about
one quarter of the effort for developing a word of executable code. Thus, for this
attitude determination and control example, the total becomes 26.0 K words. Assuming the development is in a higher-order language such as Ada (using 1 line of code
per 5 words of memory from Table 16-14), this translates to 5,200 source lines of code
for the FtreSat attitude control software.

(d) 0/5 Subtotal

(b) + (e)

23.4

10.1

64.5

(e) Total Software SIze &
Throughput Est.

16.3.2 FireSat Onboard Payload Processing

(a) + (d)

31.8

13.5

89.1

1000/0 of non-CQTS:
1.0x [(a) + (e))

23.8

8.5

89.1

55.6

22.0

178.2

111.2

44.0

356.4

As part of defining the conceptual design for FireSat, we start with the assumptions for payload control & data management given in Fig. 16-9, including fire detection and reporting and fire parameter estimation. We show our orbit and sensor
characteristic infonnation in Table 16-20. We assume all FireSat candidate sensors
operate in the single scan mode. The primary sensor differences for this example are
in the scan width and the data sample sizes which, as we will see, are key drivers in
both the system and the data flow architecture trades. The scan width options can
imply different size satellite constellations to cover the same area per unit time, or
imply multiple sensors per satellite, e.g., one satellite with a single A or B sensor can
cover the same area as either one satellite with four C sensors, or four satellites with
a single C sensor
In this example, we will focus on processor throughput. We also assume we will
use a general purpose computer (identified as GP in Table 16-22) and that the best
computer we can acquire has a throughput of 100 MIPS. (See Table 16-17 for a survey
of currently available processors.) Assuming we want to launch with 50% spare, the

Margin Calculations
(f) Needed to compensate for
requirements uncertainty

(g) On-orblt spara

l000'{' spare: 1.0 x [(e) + (f)l

EstImate of Computer
Requirements

(e) + (f) + (g)

Assumptions:
A. Three-axIs SlabDlzed vehicle using Earth sensor, Sun sensor. and rate gyros.
B. Reaclion-contro/ IhrusIers used for allitude control.
C. No function needs to be performed faster than 4 Hz; Sun sensing and ephemeris propagatlon done at 1 Hz.
D. Ground s1atIon wDI update ephemeris frequently, aDowIng for a simple propagation mode.
E. 1750A-cIass !erget computer.
F. Software developed in Ada.
G. Targat computer IlWSI have 50% spare capacI\y at launch.

Spacecraft Computer Systems

676

16.3

Payload Control & Data Management (PCDM) Interfaces & capabilities

1,>::' ·,bi:·'
ObservaUons

...1'-"_"'--'--'-"'.:;2;.

,.;

AreSet
IRSensor
(Section 9.6)

;

Control

Payload Control & Data Management
Allocated capabilities
SupportedlDerived capabilities
• Are Detection &
• Coarse Setellite Location
ReporUng
• SUrface-type Map Management
• Are Parameter
• SUn Specular Reflection Alter
EsUmaUon
• Noise Alter

1
,

Are Detection
Messages

TABLE 16-20.

Characteristics of Candidate FlreSat IR Sensors. Based on the mission
requirements, outlined in the top of this table, there is a variety of approaches to
solving the problem. We must rnap out each alternative with quantifiable
elements so that we can compare them fairly. No one solution Is better than the
next. However, one may meet our mission goals, requirements, and constraints
better than the others.

Orbital

Orbit altitude (h)

and Mission
parameters
(From Table 9-15,
p.287)

Period(F?
Ground Track Velocity

I'
I

I

available throughput is only 50 MIPS. As stated in Sec. 16.2, onboard software size
and throughput historically double from initial conceptual design to launch. To
account for this future growth, we set a maximum threshold of 25 MIPS per processor
for this conceptual design phase exercise.
The primary software estimation method we use is Bottom-up Estimation (Table
16-16). We generate the needed software information from raw data and basic
assumptions. Once we break the functions into manageable pieces, we expect to find
elements that we understand and can estimate. Table 16-21 provides an example of the
software elements and their characteristics that may be generated through the bottomup estimation process. This example is not intended to represent optimum payload
control and data management algorithms; it is presented as a set of sample algorithms
that mission processing engineers may consider. Multiple algorithm sets are often
considered for complex onboard systems, although we evaluate only one set here.
Several candidate architectures for this example are shown in Table 16-22. The first
assumed architecture is a direct (point-to-point) connection between the 1R sensor and
the processing hardware in which the payload control & data management software
will reside. The fire detection algorithm must first separate observations into "possible
fires" and "noise". For first order calculations, we assume a simple thresholding algorithm to eliminate the noise; throw out samples below an intensity threshold, and
throw out above-threshold samples for which there are no adjacent above-threshold
samples. The clusters of continuous sample data are referred to as "events." Table
16-23 identifies the processing assumptions for a general purpose processor. For all
,three sensor candidates, the throughput calculations show a prohibitive situation. For
sensor C with the narrow field of view, there appears to be some promise, but the
throughput requirement still exceeds our 25 MIPS maximum. Additionally, the information in Table 16-23 doesn't include other software that we know must operate (such
as the executive task scheduler or data 110 manager). We now must consider alternatives to our first architecture.

700 km (Defined in Sec. 7.4)
98.8 min
6,762 mls

(Vg)
Min. Elevation Angle
(E)

20 deg

Max scan time (dIVg)

30 m
4.437 msec (no overlap at Nadir)

Min scan Iraq (Vg/d)

225.4 scansls

Resolution (d)

Fig. 16-9. Allocations to Onboard Computer System for FlreSat Payload Management
Capability. This figure delineates the various functional components of the FireSat
payload management on board capability. We can either host this software in a single
onboard computer (OBC) or we can partition it between several OBCs. likewise we
might perform these functions using hardware if appropriate. How we partition the
implementation depends on the computer system design and overall mission requirements.

677

F"JreSat Example

16.3

Peak fire density

40 detectable fires in 100 km path
1,600 detectable fires in 100,000 km2

Sensor
Characteristics

Scan Width (8,,)
Pixels per Scan
Samples per Pixel (5)
Sample Rate:
Bits/Sample (b)

A:
FuJlFOV

57.9 dag
23,563 pixels
1.6 samples
37,702 /scan

B:
Fewer BHslSample

C:
QuarterFOV

57.9 deg

14.5 dag

23,563 pixels

5,891 pixels

1.6 samples
37,702 /scan

8,498.013 /sec

8,498,013 /sec

8 bRs

4 bits
0.9

1.6 samples
9,425/scan
2,124,503 /sec
8 bits
0.9

Frame Efficiency (q)

0.9

Data Rate (DR)

76 Mbps

38 Mbps

19 Mbps
75,403 /scan

301,612 /scan

150,806 /scan

Bit Rate

67.98 Mbps

33.99 Mbps

17.00 Mbps

Earth Coverage Rate

5,327 f<m2/s

5,327 km2 /s

1,203 f<m2/s

"Design ton peak fire
detection rate

85 /sec

85 Isec

BitsiScan

19/sec

One possible architectural change would be to include a separate processor,
dedicated to the thresholding process. Again, the high throughput estimates in Table
16-23 indicate this is not a viable option, given the 25 MIPS throughput limit we have
established.
Clearly now, we need to add a special-purpose sensor interface unit into the
architecture to hold the scan information, perform the noise filtering function, and
provide the events from each scan to the general purpose computer. Since a small
change in a few parameters can lead to substantially different throughput estimates, we
should perform additional analysis at this point to justify the need for this custom
equipment For example: doubling the ground resolution requirement (from 30 m to
60 m) will reduce the throughput estimate by a factor of four.

678

Spacecraft Computer Systems

16.3

TABLE 16-21. Software Elements for Payload Control and Data Management. We can use
this general format for estimating the size and throughput requirements for any
software application, based on the bottoms-up method. The chart identifies an
the elements 01 the Payload Control and Data Management function that will be
Implemented In software for the RreSat example. AdditIonally, it demonstrates
how to calculate throughput, and what external environmental conditions drive
the value. Cumulative throughput requirements are calculated In Table 16-25.
Functional
Breakdown

ExecutIon

Em.

Frequency
f

SLOC
E

InstJ UtIlIty Loop
Exe.
lost. Fact Throughput
A=5E
B
L
Est"

RRE DETECTION

Sensor VO ConIToI (BSSUlTIe DMA)
- DMA control
perSe
- Data movement
perB
Noise FIltering (data Intensfly)
- Check threshold intensities
- Generate clusterst
- Generate cluster "even\"

- BuDd Surface map
- FDter out non-land evenls
- Exclude SUn specular reIIectIon
-locate specular region
- DefIne exclusion zone
- FDter out pixels In EZ.

NlA

perSmp
perSmp
perEv
Table 16-25

NoIse Event FIltering (geographic)
- OrbIt Propagator
perSe
(Table 16-13)
- Convert to LatILong
- FDter out "Ocean fires"

1

225Hz

5
15

30

5
1

0
0

1
1

0.001 MIPS

25
75
150

0
0
0

1
1
1

25VSmp
75VSmp
150VEy

< By sImDarity:

4.5 MIPS

perEv

Table 16-25

0.020 MIPS * (225 Hzll Hz) >
10
50
250
1

l00VEy

perSe
perEv

225Hz

400
20

2,000
100

150

750

30

150
25

perSe
perEv

5

GP

=general purpose computer, SIU =sensor Inte.rface unit

~~rH

GP
1

H

~:soJ1 GP #1

GP #21

~
Sensor

3
1

2.7 MIPS
100 VEv

0
0
0

1

0.002 MIPS

1
1

0.034 MIPS
25VEv

I

-1

---.
IR
Sensor

SIU

J- rl

One Sensor to one SIU

Common data bus
between GPs and
external subsystems

- Generate containment eDIpse
- Generate average intensity
- Format message

Table 16-25

10

50

perEv
perF
perF
perF

Table 16-25

15
150
10

75
750

20

100

Communications (Table 16-13)

225Hz

50

250

1

300 VEv

0
1,000
0
0

2
2
2
1

150 VEy
3,500 VF
l00VF
l00VF

< By similarity:

2.3 MIPS

0.010 MIPS * (225 HzllHz) >

Supporting MathIUtOJIy Functs
- Square root
- Trig Functions
-Inv. Trig Functfons

Operating System

-

-

-

1,000
250
1,500

-

-

-

UtIlIty thruput
factored In
above

Assume l00A. overhead on all funcIIons

TermInology:

=InsbucIIon
=Byte
Smp =Sample- Raw dIgItaIlntensIIy information from the IR sensor representing one measurement
Se =Scen-One sweep across all pixels within the IR sensor
Ev =Event-A set of contiguous samples (2 or more) that ere not removed by the Noise FDter
F
=Rre-A set of events (may be only one) that are geographlcaDy connected scan-tlHlC8Jl
I
B

• =L *(A+B)

t EUmlnate single pixels as noise

(+) Customized SIU to handle
thresholding/clustering function
(±) Modest complexity
(-) Single GP only works for Sensor C, which
forces many sensors per sateUite. Still a
viable option.

Add Special Interface Unit
(one IR sensor to one GP)

Detennlne Fire l..atILong
perEv

(+) Maintains simplicity
(-) Does not solve GP throughput availabHity
needed for thresholding

Add Standalone Thresholding GP

One SIU to NGPs

- Convert scan/plxel to LatILong

(+) SlmpUclty-Low cost
(-) Insufficient GP throughput availability for any
sensor option

Initial ArchiteCtUre: Polnt-to-Polnt

FIRE REPORTING

Message Generation
- Correlate event to prior scans

PROs and CONs of Architecture

RreSat Architectures Evaluated

Add SIU-to-Multiple GP Capability

2,000
0

679

TABLE 16-22. Onboard Computer System Architecture Ev~lutlon for RreSat Payload
Control " Data Management Example. See text for discussion. Terminology:

lVB

225Hz

2Hz
225Hz
Table 16-25

FireSat Example

16.3

GP'1
GP#2

,,

I
I

H....----------.I
GP'N

(+) Architecture scales to support all sensor
options
(+) Architecture supports use of less capable
GPs (although it willincreese the number)
(+) Supports other subsystem options, such as
assigning one GP for spacecraft bus
operations
(-) Higher complexity: SIU generates
Information by scan segments rether than
whole scan; interfaces with external
subsystems are more complex

: Comm '
'-:1.........
Subsystem
:
- _ - - _ .... -

We need to remain flexible, so we also assume that the sensorinterface unit may
opemte as a one-sensor to many-processors interface. With the one-ta-many approach.
we assume that we can segment the fire detection and reporting capability using
parallel processing. With a single-scan sensor, we can divide each scan into N contiguous segments. Then each processor will perfonn its fire detection algorithm on a
swath of ground territory representing liN the width of the sensor field of view.
Although the software functions do not change based on effective swath width, the
special processor data management function changes with N, and we should size it
accordingly. Note that we assume we use the same basic software in all the processors.
In order to proceed with our software estimation example, we need to identify the
peak data rates from the sensor interface unit to each processor. Table 16-24 identifies
the sensor interface unit assumptions. Using the throughput estimates of Table 16-21
and the event rate estimates in Table 16-24, we are now able to estimate overall
throughput requirements for the payload control and data management software across
the sensor type and number of processor combinations. Table 16-25 presents the
computation for sensor A; the computations for sensors B and C are perfonned in the
same manner. Figure 16-10 shows, for all candidate sensors, the throughput per
processor as a function of number of processors supporting one IR sensor.

r
Ii

Spacecraft Computer Systems

680

16.3

NoIse ReducUon Throughput Calculation. For each of the three examples
shown below, we calculate the resulting throughput requirement if we were to
implement the noise reduction capability In software. Each solution exceeds our
Original 25MIP Umit imposed earner In this example. Therefore, an alternative
approach must be found (for example, we can use hardware as shown In the
candidate architectures In Table 16-22).

TABLE 16-23.

681

FireSat Example

16.3
TABLE 16-25.

EstImated Throughput Requirement for AreSat Payload Control and Data
Management Software (Sensor A). Using the IndMdual throughput estimateS
for each basic software component (Table 16-21) and the event rates
(Table 16-24), the overall throughput can be estimated. Note: For clarity of
calculation, the event rates in Table 16-24 have been converted from
events/scan to events/sec using a scan rate of 225 Hz.

Throughput Calculations Using NoIse Filtering Instruction Estimates (Table 16-21)

Throughput (MIPS)

250 Instructions executed per above-threshold sample
25 Instructions executed per above-threshold sample

B:

A:
FuliFOY
Peak % above threshold

Small Sample Size

C:
Quarter FOY

2"k

1%

3n Iscan

754/scan

94 Iscan

Samples below T

37,325 Iscan

36,948 Iscan

9,331 Iscan

1,027,367/scan

GP Inst per second
ImpUcation

1,112,196 Iscan

232 MIPS
Won't Fit In GP

256,842 Insf/scan

251 MIPS
Won't Fit in GP

58 MIPS
ExceedsUmit

1

2

5

10

Payload Control &
Data Management

Peak EventslSec:

85,050

42,525

17,100

8,550

Onboard Software

PeakAresISec:

42,525

21,263

8,550

4,275

Data Transfer from SIU

1%

Samples above T

GP Instructions

No. Processors:

Functional Breakdown for

Throughput
Formula

-SensorA0.001

0.001

0.001

0.053

0.027

OMA Control

0.001 MIPS

0.001

Data Movement
(data rate in Table 16-24)

1 InstIByte

0.257

0.130

Noise Filtering Geographic
Orbit Propagator (Table 16-13)
Convert ScanlPixel to LA TILONG

4.5MIPS

4.500

4.500

4.500

4.500

300 InstlEvent

12.758

6.413

2.565

1.283

Fiiter Out "Ocean Fires"
TABLE 16-24.

AreSat IR Sensor-to-Processor Interface Unit Characteristics. this table
shows how to calculate thE1 throughput requirements for various sensor conflg.
urations and differing numbers of general purpose computers.

Number of events In scan, rime of scan
Number of samples, first pixel location
Measured Intensity

(60 bits)
(32 bits)
(8 bits)

For Single-Sensor to Multlple-GP Configuration
Scan Is segmented according to number, N, of general purpose CPUs In use.
Dynamic thresholding performed over each segment of scan.
Maximum number of
events per scan, based
on Sensor scan width
and number of general
purpose processors In

use:

Peak data transfer rate
(Mbps), based on
Sensor scan width and
number of general
purpose processors
In use:

G.P.
CPUs
N=1
N=2
N=5
N=10

IR Sensor
A
189
95

B

38

378
189
76

19

38

G.P.
CPUs

A

IRSensor
B

N=1
N=2
N=5
N= 10

2.058
1.041
0.425
0.219

3.422
1.718
0.699
0.356

C

48
24
10
5

Filter Out Non-Land Events

2.7 MIPS

2.700

2.700

2.700

2.700

100 InstlEvent

4.253

2.138

0.855

0.428

Exclude Sun Specular Reflection

SIU maintains informetion from the lest 2 scans (allow for GP collection delays).
One "message" generated per scan (or scan segment).
Message per Scan:
per Event
per Sample

Build Surface Map

events per scan
events per scan
events per scan
events per scan

C
0.533

Mbps (SIU to GP)

0.273
0.122
0.068

Mbps (SIU to GP)
Mbps (SIU to GP)
Mbps (SIU to GP)

Locate Specular Region

0.002 MIPS

0.002

0.002

0.002

0.002

Define Exclusion Zone for Scan

0.034 MIPS

0.034

0.034

0.034

0.034

Filter Out Pixels in E. Z.

25 InstlEvent

1.063

0.534

0.214

0.107

0.026

0.013

0.005

0.003

6.379

3.206

1.283

0.641

0.298

0.149

0.060

0.030

0.009

0.004

0.002

0.001

0.009

0.004

0.002

0.001

2.250

2.250

2.250

2.250

3.428

2.195

1.447

1.198

37.96

24.27

15.97

13.20

Rre Reporting
Determine Fire LATILONG
Convert ScanlPixel to LA TILONG 300 Insf/Event
Message Generation
500 Insf/Event
Correlate Event to Prior Scans
3,500 InstlFire
Generate Containment Ellipse
100 Insf/Fire
Generate Average Intensity
100 Insf/Fire
Format Message
2.250 MIPS
Communications (Table 16-13)
10% of above
Operating System
Total Throughput EstImate per Processor (MIPS)-

Based on the overall throughput requirement curves in Fig. 16-10, it appears .that
sensor A is viable if there are two processors, each handling half of the field of V1~w.
Sensor B requires a minimum of four processors. Sensor B has a smaller sample sIZe
(therefore a lower raw data rate), but the lower fidelity of the data does not allow
sufficient noise reduction to lower the number of events being passed to the processor.
This demonstrates the strong sensitivity between the noise reduction capability and the
required processor throughput to detect fires. This noise reduction element has now

682

Spacecraft Computer Systems

iii'

100

!:

.

g

-

80

.8.

60

ie

s
.c
'"m
e
{:
e

~

_

-

-

c:

\
40

::I

~

-A:FuDFOV
B: $maD Sample SIze
Quarter FOV
_ _ 25 MIPS DesIgn

-

0

lL

16.3

, ",

....

~

.....

...... ..... - --------: =--:. =--:. =---:. =

20

o
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

16.3

FireSat Example

683

real-time deadlines associated with spacecraft and payload processing are unrelated,
t they will have to be arbitrated. A detailed trade study is needed to address the life
~;cle o~ t!te sy~tern, from conceptual design through development, integration, test,
and orbIt insertion.
For software cost, the most useful indicator is the number of source lines of code,
r SLOCs. Various methods exist for determining overall effort and development
~uration from the total number of SLoes and softw~ .productivity rates (See T~ble
20-10 in Sec. 20.3 or Boehm [1984). When determining the total SLoe, consuler
only the software that we must develop. In the payl?ad processing example, we c~­
centrated on the executable SLoe. For overall costing, we must remember to add m
the SLOCs for startup, system initiaIization, mode transition, f~ult ~nses, ~d
other identified functions. In the attitude control example, our estimatiOn method did
not use SLOes. For estimates made by similarity, the SLoe counts should be
developed in the same manner as memory and throughput. If SLCX:: info~tion is ~t
available, then an order-of-magnitude estimate can ~ generated usmg the information
in Table 16-10 to convert a memory estimate to eqwvalent SLOCS.

Number of Processors
Fig. 16-10. Throughput Curves for FlreSat Example. These curves fIIustrate how we can trade
the number of onboard processors against the throughput and quantity of each
processor to meet our overall mission requirements. Depending on size, weight and
power constraints, as weil as cost, we can determine which solution best meets our
mission needS.

been identified to be a driver, given the algorithm suite provided in this example. It
appears that sensor C can perfonn the mission with a single processor; however, the
limited field of view of sensor C may imply the need for additional sensors per
spacecraft.
Since processors are not 100% reliable, we need to establish a redundancy strategy.
This strategy will involve the use- of distributed vs. federated architectures. For a
federated architecture, we will likely need 2-for-l redundancy for each processor. A
distributed architecture-if the sm can suPP,Ort it-may allow more cost-effective
collective redundancy such as 3-for-2. Given this, our preliminary conclusion is that
sensor A in a distributed processing architecture will result in the fewest number of
onboard processors for the complete FireSat system. Of course we recognize that this
is sensitive to our assumptions and will continue to examine the trade space carefully.
16.3.3 Spacecraft and Payload Processing Consolidation and Effort Estimation

Although we have dealt only with selected elements of onboard processing for the
FrreSat space vehicle, areas of commonality have already emerged. As shown in
Tables 16-19 and 16-21, both spacecraft and payload software requires mathematical
library functions and some type of operating system. Some, perhaps significant, cost
containment can be achieved using common elements: processors, software languages, utility libraries, and real-time operating systems.
Since the attitude control throughput requirement is small compared to the payload
software, the spacecraft software may co-exist with the payload processing. Although
merging the two may reduce the overall number of processors, the system development complexity may increase. Merging them induces tight coupling between the
spacecraft and payload, and may increase system integration complexity. The hard-

References
Anderson, Christine and Merlin Dorfman, eds. 1991. Aerospace Software Engineering
.Washington, DC: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
Beckert, Beverly A. 1993. "'The Lowdown on Benchmarks.'~ Computer Aided Engineering 112(6):16(1), June.
Boehm, B.W.1981. Software Engineering &orwmics. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Boehm, B.W. 1984. "Software Life Cycle Factors," in Handbook of Software.
Engineering. ed. C.R. Vick and C.V. Ramamoorthy. New York: Van Nostrand
Reinhold Co.

Cl.uanti-

Hennessy, John L. and David A. Patterson. ~995. Computer Architecture: A
tative Approach (2nd Edition). San FranClSCo~ CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.

Humphrey, Watts S. 1995. A Discipline for Software Engineering (SEI Series in Software Engineering). Reading. MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Co.
Kaner, Cern, Jack FaIk, and Hung Quoc Nguyen. 1993. Testing Computer Software.
Scottsdale, AZ: The Coriolis Group.
Lane, Malcolm G. and James D. Mooney. 1988. A Practical Approach to Operating
Systems. Boston: Boyd & Fraser.
Magnus, Chris. 1992. Software for Fault Tolerant Systems: A Development Handbook. Prepared for The National Center for Dependable Systems.
Rullo, T.A., ed. 1980. Advances in Computer Programming Management. Philadelphia: Heyden & Sons, Inc.
Santoni, Andy. 1997. "Standard Tests for Embedded Processors to be Set by Industry." InfoWorld 19(31): 34(1).

684

Spacecraft Computer Systems

16.3

Silbersc~atz, Abraham and Peter Baer Galvin. 1997. Operating System Concepts

Reading, MA: Addison Wesley Publishing Co.

.

Stankovic, John A. and Krithi Ramamritham. 1988. Tutorial: Hard Real-Time
Systems. IEEE Catalog Number EH0276-6. Washington, DC: Computer Society
Press of the IEEE.

Chapter 17

Vick, C.R. and C.V. Ramamoortby, eds. 1984. Handbook of Software Engineering
New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold Co.
.

Space Propulsion Systems

Yourdon, E. 1989. ModemStructured Analysis. New Jersey: Yourdon.

Robert L. Sackheim, TRW, Inc.
Sidney Zafrail, TRW, Inc.
17.1 Propulsion Subsystem Selection and Sizing
17.2 Basics of Rocket Propulsion
17.3 Types of Rockets
Liquid Rockets; Solid Rockets; Hybrid Rockets;

Electric Propulsion
17.4 Component Selection and Sizing
17.5 Staging

In the broadest sense, space propulsion systems do three things. They lift the launch
vehicle and its payload from the launch pad and place the payload into low-Earth orbit.
They transfer payloads from low-Earth orbits into higher orbits for mission operations
or into trajectories for planetary encounters. Finally, they provide thrust for attitude
control and orbit corrections. Table 17-1 lists the specific functions these systems
perfonn during various mission phases and some typical perfonnance requirements.
Perfonnance requirements for propulsion systems include thrust, total impulse, and
duty cycle specifications derived from mission profiles. Individual designs must meet
other performance requirements, such as operating pressure, and internal and external
leakage. Other specifications include physical characteristics, propellant, and mass
properties. Configuration requirements include envelope dimensions, thruster locations, and alignment. In addition, plume efflux is frequently a design driver for
payloads sensitive to contamination.
Once a payload is placed in low-Earth orbit by the launcher, an upper stage or
onboard spacecraft integral propulsion system (see Table 17-2) is frequently used to
transfer the payload to its operational orbit. These in-space propulsion system designs,
especially their weight, size, and volume, are strongly driven by the performance and
weight efficiency of the primary propulsion system. The specific impulse, propellant
density, and overall stage mass fraction of the primary propulsion system are key
parameters. Table 18-5 in Sec. 182 summarizes key features and performance characteristics of existing and planned upper stages for use with various launch vehicles.
With the heavy emphasis on driving down the cost of access to space, while still
staying within the capabilities of the current fleet of launch vehicles, many space
systems' prime contractors are designing and emphasizing higher efficiency and

685

r
I
/1

Space Propulsion Systems

686

TABLE 17-1. 'JYp\caI Functions and Requirements for Space Propulsion. The change in
velocity required for orbit maneuvers Is caOed I::t.v. See Table 7-3 In Sec. 7.3 for
specific flV requirements.
Propulsion Function

Typical Requirement

Orbit transfer to GEO (orbit Insert/on)
• Perigee bum

2,400mls

• Apogee bum

1,500 (low incfmation) to 1,800 mls (hIgh inclination)

Initial spinup

1 to 60 rpm

LEO to higher orbit raising flV

60 to 1,500 mls

• Drag-makeup flV

60 to 500 mls

• Controlled-reentry flV

120 to 150 mls

Acceleration to escape velocity
from LEO parking orbit

17.1

bipropellants for AV and monopropellant attitude control); (3) one of several different
electric propulsion options, depending upon power available, bum time vs. weight
requirements and considerations such as propellant commonality, volume limitations
and electromagnetic issues. Typical spacecraft electric propulsion options are tesistojets (delivering -300 sec Isp using decomposed hydrazine), arcjets (delivering
-500-700 sec Igpo using decomposed hydrazine or ammonia), Hall effect thrusters
(delivering -1,500-2,000 sec Isp using Xenon and derived from Russian technology
applied to Russian satellites such as GALS and GONAS), and ion propulsion (delivers
-2,000-3,000 sec Isp, also using Xenon). As more and more of the orbit raising
impulse is incorporated on board the spacecraft instead of using a separate upper stage,
modem designs are typically using an optimized combination of chemical and electric
or hybrid onboard propulsion.

3,600 to 4,000 mls Into J)ianetary trajectory

On-orbit operations (orbit maintenance)

rpm

• Despln

60 to 0

• Spin control

±1 to ±5rpm

• Orbit correction flV

15 to 75 mls per year

• East-West stationkeeplng flV

3 to 6 mls per year

• North-South stationkeeplng I::t.V

45 to 55 mls per year

• Survivability or evasive maneuvers
(highly variable) flV

150 to 4,600 mls

Attitude control

3-10"04 of total propellant mass

• Acquisition of Sun, Earth, Star

low total impulse, typically <5,000 N's, 1 K to 10K
pulses, 0.01 to 5.0 sec pulse width

• On-orbit normal mode control with
3-axis stabilization, limit cycle

lOOK to 200 K pulses, minimum Impulse bit of
0.01 N's, 0.01 to 0.25 sec pulse width

• Precession control
(spinners only)

low total Impulse, typically <7,000 N's, 1 K to 10 K
pulses, 0.02 to 0.20 sec pulse width

• Momentum management
(wheel unloading)

5 to 10 pulse trains every few days, 0.02 to 0.10 sec
pulse width

• 3-axis control during flV

OnIoff pulsing, 10 K to lOOK pulses, 0.05 to 0.20 sec
pulse width

low-cost. onboard spacecraft integral propulsion systems (IPS). The functions of the
onboard IPS are to provide much of the propulsion energy for ascent from low-Earth
orbit to higher operational orbits and for controlled de-orbitlreentry at the end of
mission life, in addition to the normal on-orbitattitude and velocity control propulsion
functions. Spacecraft IPS have become almost routine for most designs. More than
85% of all spacecraft launched have operational orbits of greater than 500 km. In
addition, new international regulations make controlled de-orbit a mandatory requirement which increases the onboard IPS energy requirements.
With this need for higher onboard IPS propulsion energy almost all spacecraft
today employ one of three IPS designs or some combmation: (1) storable bipropellant
(i.e., employing N20 4 and monomethylhydrazine, or MMH, as the propellants);
(2) Dual mode propulsion (employing N20 4 and hydrazine as high performance

Propulsion Subsystem SelectiQn and Sizing

17.1 Propulsion Subsystem Selection and Sizing
The process for selecting and sizing the elements of the propulsion subsystem is
shown in Table 17-2. We must carefully estimate the key performance requirements
in steps 1 to 3 since they have the greatest impact on operation, weight. and cost. In
step 4 we identify as many reasonable options as possible, and pare the list down to a
few that have merit We then proceed to step 5 to develop sufficient detail to estimate
the performance, mass, and cost of each option.
TABLE 17-2. PropulsIon Subsystem Selection and Sizing Process.
Description of Process

Step

Reference

1

Ust applicable spacecraft propulsion functions, e.g., orbit Insertion,
orbit maintenance, attitude control, and controDed de-orbit or reentry

Table 17-1

2

Determine AV budget and thrust level constraints for orbit insertion
and maintenance
Determine totaJ impulse for attitude control, thrust levels for control
authority, duty cycles (% on/off, totaJ number of cycles) and mission

Sec. 7.3

3

life requirements
4

Determine propulsion system options:
• Combined or separate propulsion systems for orbit and attitude
control
• High vs. low thrust
• Uquid vs. sond vs. electric propulsion technology

5

Estimate key parameters for each option
• Effective Isp for orbit and attitude control
• Propenant mass
• Propellant and pressurant volume
• Configure the subsystem and create equipment list

6

EstImete total mass and power for each option

7

Establish baseline propulsion subsystem

8

Document results and iterate as required

Table 17-1,
Sec.l0.3,
Chap. 11

Sees. 17.1, 17.3

Sees. 17.1, 17.3
Table 17-3
Tables 17-4,
17-6,17-7
Table 10-7

Table 17-3 lists the primary options. Cold gas propulsion systems are inexpensive,
low performance systems that are rarely used unless there is an overriding requirement
to avoid the hot gases and safety concerns of liquid and solid systems. Solid

688

Space Propulsion Systems

17.2

Basics of Rocket Propulsion

17.2

propellant-based systems have been used extensively for orbit insertion,but the spacecraft propulsion subsystem must be augmented with another technology to provide
orbit maintenance and attitude control. Liquid systems are divided into monopropellant and bipropellant systems with a third alternative, dual mode, that is a bipropellant
derivative. Monopropellant systems have successfully provided orbit maintenance and
attitude control functions, but lack the performance to provide high efficiency large t.V
maneuvers required for orbit insertion. Bipropellant systems are attractive because
they can provide all three functions with one higher performance system, but they are
more complex than the historic solid rocket and monopropellant combined systems.
TABLE 17-3. Principal Options for Spacecraft Propulsion Subsystems. See Sec. 17.3 for a
definition of specific rocket types.
Orbit Insertion
procuision
Tee nology

Perigee

Apogee

Cold Gas
Solid

Orbit Maintenance
and Maneuvering

Attitude
Control

~

~

689

Thermal SIandoIf/
Barriar1lJbe

Hydrazlne In"

Typical Steady
State l

(8) sp

30-70
280-300

~

~

~

~

220-240

Bipropellant

~

~

~

~

305-310

Dual mode

~

~

~

~

313-322

Hybrid

~

~

~

250-340

~

~

300-3,000

Liquid

Monopropellant

Electric

Dual-mode systems are integrated mono and bipropellant systems fed by common
fuel tanks. These systems are actually hybrid designs that use hydrazine (N2H4) both
as a fuel for high performance bipropellant engines (i.e., N2041N2~) and as a monopropellant with conventional low-thrust catalytic thrusters. The hydrazine is fed to
both the bipropellant engines and the monopropellant thrusters from the common fuel
tank. In this manner, high specific impulse is provided for long t.V burns at high thrust
(e.g., apogee circularization) and reliable, precise, minimum-impulse burns are pr0vided by the monopropellant thrusters for attitude control. An additional capability to
enhance dual-mode propulsion is the development of a bimodal thrust device which
can operate either as a simple catalytic monopropellant thruster or as a high performance bipropellant thruster known as the Secondary Combustion Augmented
Thruster or SCAT shown in Fig. 17~1.
Practical considerations may restrict the propellant choices to those that are readily
available, storable, and easy to handle. Also, we must trade the lead time needed to
develop new hardware against the combination of existing components or stages.
Finally, limits on payload acceleration may dictate the maximum permissible thrust
levels.

Two basic parameters of rocket engine design are thrust and specific impulse.
Thrust, F, is the amount of force applied to the rocket based on the expulsion of gases:

mYe +AlPe -P",,]=m'i

where Ae is nozzle exit area, Pe is the gas pressure at the nozzle exit, P"" is the ambient
pressure, Ve is propellant exhaust velocity, and mis propellant mass flow rate. We
simplify this expression by derming an effective exhaust velocity, C, as:
(17-2)
Equation (17-1) then reduces to:
F=mC

(17-3)

At very high altitudes and in space, P"" is essentially zero; at lower altitudes, a rocket
engine's thrust increases with altitude until the vehicle leaves the atmosphere.
Specific impulse, [sp' is the ratio of the thrust, F, to the weight flow rate, mg, of
propellant
[sp

aF/mg

(17-4)

lsp is a measure of the energy content of the propellants, and how efficiently it is
converted into thrust For a chemical rocket, [sp is directly proportional to the square
root of the ratio of the chamber temperature, Tco to the average molecular weight of the
exhaust gases, M, as follows:
(17-5)

17.2 Basics of Rocket Propulsion

F=

Rg.17-1. Secondary Combustion Augmented Thruster (SCAT). Bimodal spacecraft attitude
and velocity control RCS thruster.

(17-1)

where K is a proportionality constant depending on the ratio of specific heats of the
exhaust. gas and the engine pressure ratio. This important relationship shows that we
can maximize specific impulse by matching the highest possible total temperature
with the lowest average molecular weight of the combustion products.

Space Propulsion Systems

690

17.2

The primary ~ure of propulsion system performance capability is the velocity
change, Il.V, that It can produce. We quantify this relationship by the rocket equation:·

Il.V= gIspln(

mo

mo -11lp

)==glspln(mo)==gIspln(R)

(17-6)

mf

where "!! == mo - '!!P is the final vehicle mass, mo is the initial vehicle mass, 11lp is the
mass of the propellant consumed, and R == mo / 1nJ is the mass ratio. This equation
~umes zero l~ses due to drag and gravity, and is thus a limiting ideal case. In practice, the ..1V achieved will be somewhat smaller. Gravity and drag losses for launch
vehicles are typically 1,500-2,000 mls.
. Another form o~ Eq. (17-6) provides the mass of propellant required for a given
mcrement of velOCIty, Il.V:
(17-7)
This equation allows us to calculate the mass of propellant required based on either the
initial or final mass of the rocket.
We obtain the highest thrust when exit pressure equals ambient pressure. Although
Eq. (17-1) s~ggests that greater thrust can be obtained with an exit pressure greater
than the ambIent pressure, the exhaust velocity is reduced, resulting in a loss of thrust.
As a result, we design rocket exhaust nozzles with an exit pressure equal to the ambient ~ure ~enever possible. The exit pressure is governed by the nozzle-area
expanswn ratto:

(17-8)

691

Types of Rockets

17.3

(17-9)

C* = PeA,

m

where At is area of the nozzle throat, and Pc is the combustion chamber pressme.
Delivered values of C* range from 1,333 mls for monopropellant hydrazine (N214) to
1,640 mls for Earth-storable bipropellants (N2041MMH) and up to 2,360 mls for
cryogenic L02/LH2' The thrust coefficient, Cft is a measure of the efficiency of converting the energy to exhaust velocity and characterizes the nozzle performance.
(17-10)

cf==L
PeA,

Representative values for Cf are 1.6 (for nozzle expansion mtio, E =30:1) and 1.86
(for E 200:1). The product of these two Figures of Merit, divided by the gravity
constant, gives the specific impulse:
(17-11)
Isp = F/mg = C*

=

ct /g

The physical parameters that intemct to produce hot gases and associated thrust inside
a chemical rocket chamber are illustrated in Fig. 17-2. Further information is given by
NASA [1963].

.

• •••
~

t Pat

Fuel
Inlet

)

Thrust~ P.o ~
(F)

-+

t

t

t

As

~Exhaust

Combustion

Chamber

• •••

~

where Ae is the nozzle exit area and At is the area of the throat of the nozzle. Note that
as the expansion ratio increases, the nozzle exit pressure decreases.
~or launch vehicles (particularly first stages) where the ambient pressure varies
durmg ~e bum period, trajectory computations are performed to determine the optimum eXIt pressure. However, an additional constraint is the maximum allowable
~iamet~ for the nozzle exit cone, which in some cases is the limiting constraint. This
IS especIally true on stages other than the first, where the nozzle diameter may not be
larger than the outer diameter of the stage below.
For space engines, where the ambient pressure is zero, thrust is always higher with
l~er n~zzle exp~on m~os. On these engines, we increase the nozzle expansion
mtio until the additional weIght of the longer nozzle (and increase in real nozzle internal boundary layer or drag losses) costs more performance than the extra thrust it
genemtes.
. Another im~t relations~.for eval~ting rocket performance involves two key
FI~ of Ment, the chamcteristic velOCIty of the combustion gases and the thrust
coeffiCIent. The characteristic velocity, C*, is a measure of the energy available from
the combustion process and is given by:

Rg.17-2. Simplified Diagram of a Chemical Rocket. Combustion of fuel and oxidizer In the
combustion chamber produces expansion of the reaction product gases which are
then expelled through the nozzle. The differential between pressure Inside the chamber (Pc) and at the nozzle exit (Pe ) produces a reaction that propels the chamber and
the vehicle in a direction opposite to that of the exhaust gases. AtmospheriC pressure
(P_) reduces the effective thrust (F), so that a rocket engine actuaDy works more efficiently In outer space than In the Earth's atmosphere. This simplified combustion
chamber ol8gram is also representative of a monopropeUant rocket (one fuel Inlet only
and the upper portion of the chamber Is packed with catalyst). and of a solid rocket
(where there are no inlets because both the fuel and oxidizer are preloaded In the
chamber and bum only upon command for Ignition).

• The rocket equation was developed in the late nineteenth centmy and first published by Konstantin Tsiolkov,:;ky [1903], a deaf Russian schoolteacher who was the first to develop much
of the mathematical theory of modern rocketry. The most dramatic crater on the far side of the
Moon was named Tsiolkovsky following its discovery in 1959 by the Soviet probe Luna 3.

approaches may be feasible someday, but their consideration is beyond the scope of
this book. Table 17-4 and Table 17-5 list the general chamcteristics of several types of
propulsion systems.

OxIdizer
Inlet

t

P.o

t

t

t

17.3 Types of Rockets
Currently available space propulsion systems can be categorized as either cold gas,
chemical, or electric. More exotic types, such as nuclear, solar sails or beamed-energy

692

Space Propulsion Systems

17.3

TABLE 17-4. Performance and Operating Characteristics of Propellants and Energy
Sources for Spacecraft Propulsion Systems. These propellant and energy

sources start with the low-efflciency cold gas system and work up to the highest
efficiency, space-qualified system, electromagnetic.

Type

Cold Gas

SoRdMotor

Vacuum

Thrust

Isp

Thrust

Range

Range

AvgBulk
Density

Propellant

Energy

(sec)

(N)

(Ibt)

(g/cm3)

N:!, NHa.
Freon,
helfum

High
pressure

50-75

0.05-200

0.Q1-50

0.28" 0.60,
0.96*

t

ChemIcal

280--300

50-5 x lOS

10010S

1.80

H2~,N2H4

Exothermic
decom·
position

150-225

0.05-0.5

0.01--{).1

1.44,1.0

Uquld:
Monopropellant

Bipropellant

Cold gas propulsion is just a controlled. pressurized gas source ~d ~ nozzle. It
the simplest form of rocket engine. Cold gas has many applicatiOns where
d~
. T"
simplicity is more important than high perform~ce. The Manne maneuvenng unzt
used by astronauts is an example of such a system.
..
Chemical combustion systems are the most common systems for space applications. They can be divided into three basic categories: liquid. solid. ~d hybrid. The
terminology refers to the physical state of the stored ~opel!an~. Typically. roc~ets
using solid propellants are called motors and rockets usmg liqwds are called engmes

represents

or thrusters.
TABLE 17-5. Advantages and Disadvantages of Propellants and Energy Sources for
Spacecraft Propulsion Systems.

Type

Cold Gas

~andRP·l

Chel11lcal

350

5--5 x 106

I-lOS

1.14 and 0.80

~andH2

Chemical

450

5--5 x lOS

HOS

1.14 and 0.07

N:!0 4 and
MMH(N2H4•
UDMH)

Chemical

300-340

5-- 5 x lOS

I-lOS

1.43 and 0.86
(1.0.0.79)

Propellant

F2 and N:!H4

ChemIcal

425

HOS

1.5 and 1.0

HIgh perlonnance

Low perfonnance. higher weight
than blpropellant
More complicated system

OF2and~H6

Chemical

430

5--5 x lOS

I-lOS

1.5 and 0.44

~andH2

Very high perfonnance

CryogenIc, complIcated

CIFs and N2H4

Chemical

350

5--5 x lOS

I-lOS

1.9 and 1.0

~04and

Storable. good perfonnance

Complicated

Very high perfonnance

ToxIc. dangerous, complicated

OF2and~H6 Very high performance
CIFsand~4 HIgh performance

ToxIc. dangerous. complicated

Blpropellant

~02.~H4

Simple. renable.lo~

~andRP·l

DuaJMode

N:!OJNii4

Chemical

330

3-200

-

1.9 and 1.0

H20-+~+02

Electric I
chemical

340-380

50-500

10-100

1.0

F2and N2H4

Chemical

225

O2 and rubber

225--3.5 x lOS 50-75.000

1.14 and 1.5

Bectrothermal:

ArtJet

Dual Mode
N:!. NH3•
N2H", H2

Resistive
heating

150-700

0.005-0.5

0.001--{).1

028*. 0.60, 1.0.
0.019*

NHa. N2H", H2

Electric arc
heating

450-1.500

0.05--5

0.01-1

0.60. 1.0. 0.019*

Conoid
Hall Effect

Thruster

Water
Electrolysis

Hybrid

N:!0AH4

High performance

H:zO->H2+~ HIgh perfonnance
~and

rubber

ThrotIIeable. nonexplosIve;
nontoxic. restartable

Bectrotherma/:

Bectrostatic:
Ion

:Ferns

5--5 x 106

Water
Electrolysis

ResistoJet

DISadvan1ageS

Very low perfonnance, heaviest of
all
for given perfonnance
lev
Sbnpte. renable. relatively low cost Umfted perfonnance. higher thrust,
safety Issues; perfonnance not
adjustable

SolId Motor
Uquld:
Monopropellant

AcMmtages

Extremely simple, reliable, very
N2• NHa.
Freon. henum low cost

MMH (N:!H",
UDMH)

Hybtld

693

Types of Rockets

17.3

HglAlXelCs

Electrostatic

2.0006.000

5x 10-a.0.5

lo-a.O.l

13.510.44*12.73*
/1.87

Glycerine

Electrostatic

1,200

5 x 10-a.0.05

10-a.0.Ol

126

Xenon

Electrostatic

1.5002.500

5x 10-a.0.l

10-a.0.02

022

25--200

5--50

0.44*

Bectromagnetic:
Argon

Magnetic

2.000

Pulsed
Plasma

Teflon

Magnetic

1.500

Pulsed inductive

Argon
N2H4

Magnetic
Magnetic

4,000
2.500

5x 10-a.0.005 10-a.0.001

22

0.5--50
0.5--50

* Gas densftles at standard conditions of pressure and temperature
t Severat types In use: OrganIc polymers + ammonium perchlorate + powdered aluminum.
:j: MPD a magnetoplasmadynamfc

0.44
1.0

Requl18S oxidizer fuel system;
bulkier than sonds

~.NH3.~H", High performance. low power.
sIriIpIe feed system
H2

More complicated Interfaces. more
power than chemical; low thrust

Arcjet

NHa. N2H", H2 HIgh perfonnance. simple feed
system

HIgh power. compUcated Interfaces
(especIaDy thermal)
.

BectrostatIc:
Very hIgh performance

Very high power. low thrust,
complicated. not wall deve/oped

Glycerine

Moderately high perfonnance

Xenon

==de~

High devaJopment risk, high power.
complicated
HIgh development risk, high power.
coinpllcated

MPD

Argon

Very high performance

Very high power. high development
risk, exjlanslve. complicated

Pulsed Plasma

Teflon

High performance

Low thrust, high power.
contam!netion, compUcated

Pulsed
Inductive

~H4

Argon

=xahl9h performance.
laIethrust

High develop. risk, complicated,
expensive. very high power

Ion

HaJJ Effect

Hg/AlXelCs

TIuvster

Bectromagnelic:
2-200
2-200

Tox/c. dangerous
Complicated. not developed,
high power

ResfstoJet

Conoid

MPD*

ToX/c. dangerous

694

Space Propulsion Systems

17.3

Types of Rockets

17.3

17.3.1 Liquid Rockets
In a liquid rocket system propellants are stored as liquids in tanks and fed on
demand into the combustion chamber by gas pressurization or a pump. Bipropellant
engines chemically react a fuel and an oxidizer, and monopropeUant engines catalytically decompose a single propellant. Bipropellant engines deliver a higher specific
impulse but involve additional system complexity and cost. Table 17-6 shows liquid
rocket engines used for upper stages or integral propulsion systems on spacecraft.
TABLE 17-8.

Engine
XLR-132

Developer

Nominal

Spec.

Thrust

Impulse

(N)

(sec)

Propellants

340

N20 4IMMH

Rocketdyne 1.67x 1()4

Oper.
LHe

~

1
I
I.
I

1

: FlD and Vent
Assembly

Engine
Mass
(kg)

Status

5,000

51.26

In development

1 " * 1 - " - - - 4 - - - - - - - 1 ___________ J I

57.15

In development

I

(sec)

Aerojet

1.67x 1()4 330-338

N20 4IMMH

5,400

Transtage

Aerojet

3.56)( 1()4

315

N2OJA-50

1,000 107.95

Aown .

Delta-II

Aerojet

4.36 x 1()4

320

~OJMMH

1,200

Rown

99.79

R-4D

Marquardt

4.00 x 1()3

309

~JMMH

25,000

7.26

OMElUR

Aerojet

2.67 x 1()4

340

N20 4IMMH

1,200

90.72

Qualified

7.34 x 1()4

446

LO:llH2

DMILAE

TRW

4.45 x 102

315

N2OJN4 H4

15,000

4.54

Rown

R4-D

Marquardt

4.89 x 102

310

N20JMMH

20,000

3.76

Rown

400 138.35

I

PropelJantTank I
Assemb\y

Modified Orbiter
maneuvering
engine

Pratt &

Whitney

200 psIa Nominal
OperatIng Pressure

I
I
I

':...:I:=-':I:..=.,a..---------,

Right qualified
(Centaur)

I

R42

Marquardt

8.90 x 102

305

MON-3IMMH

15,000

4.54

Qualified

MMBPS

TRW

4.45 x 102

302

N20JMMH

20,000

5.22

Right qualified

RS-41

Rocketdyne

1.11x1()4

312

N20 4IMMH

2,000 113.40

Right qualified
(Peacekeeper)

ADLAE

TRW

4.45 x102

330

N2OJN2H4

28,000

4.50

Chandra
TRW
X-Ray
Observatory

4.25 x 1()3

322.5

N2OJN2H4

25,000

4.5

Right qualified

HS601

ARCILPG

4.89 x 102

312

N20 4IMMH

10,000

4.08

In development

R-40A

Marquardt

4.00 x 1()3

309

N20 4IMMH

25,000

7.26

Qualified (mod.
of Shuttle RCS
engine)

HPLAM

TRW

4.45 x102

325

N20JMMH

30,000

4.60

In advanced
development

AKE

'--------~-----------~--i
_____ J1 __________________________
4,000 psIa
Tank Assembly
1

Examples of Available Uquld Rocket Engines. For up-to-date and more
detailed Information, contact the developer.

Transtar

RL1D-A

695

In qual.

PropeDant Supply I
Assembly
I
1
1Trim Orifice
1_ _ _ _ _ J _______ _

1

1

Liquid Bipropellant Engines. Figure 17-3 is a schematic of a bipropellant propulsion system used to change a spacecraft's velocity and to adjust its orbit. It is
pressure-fed, uses Earth-storable propellants, and is designed for long life. This system
contains one l00-lbf , radiation-cooled liquid-fueled engine that uses N20 4 and
monomethylhydrazine (MMH) propellants. There are two positive expulsion tanks for
the fuel and two for the oxidizer. A pressurant tank stores helium at about 4,000 psia,
and a quad-redundant regulator-coupled with a burst disc and relief valve--;egulates

I

1-_-------------------------Rg. 17-3. Pressure-Fed Propulsion System Using Earth-Storabfe Blpropellant (N20 ,
MMH). Propulsion system designers trade-off reliabDity and safety
and mass.

with complexity

flow. Together, they ensure 200 psia feed pressure to the propellant tanks, even after
any single regulator failure. Both the fuel and oxidizer tanks can use propellant
management devices to feed propellants to the 100 lhrengine on demand. Burst discs
and pyrotechnically actuated squib valves isolate propellants from the engine (and
high-pressure gas from the propellant tanks) until the system is ready for ope11llion.
Isolating the fluid enhances overall system reliability. This system also has manual fill
and drain valves to load propellant and pressurant gas into the system, as well as
additional manual valves for system leak checking on both sides of the pyro-isolation
valves and regulators. Check valves ensure that fluid flow is only in the correct

696

Space Propulsion Systems

17.3

~tion ~d that the fuel and oxidizer can never mix anywhere in the system. except
m the engme. Fmally, pressure transducers, filters, temperature sensors, and line and
component heaters are provided to ensure proper subsystem operation.
Another type of system uses a cryogenic topping cycle engine. The fuel first travels
through the thrust chamber's cooling jacket in a technique known as regenerative
cooling. All ~f the fuel burns with part of the oxidizer in a high-pressure precombustor.
The combustion products provide high-energy gas to drive the engine pump turbines.
The total exhaust flow from the turbine is then injected into the main combustion
chamber, where it burns with the remaining oxidizer. Because of the precombustor, the
cycle lends itself to high-pressure operation, which results in a smaller thrust chamber.
The extra pressure drop in the precombustQr and turbines requires the pump-discharge
pressure of both the fuel and the oxidizer to be much higher than with open-cycle
e~gines. Th~ f:'>pping cycle therefore needs heavier and more complex pumps, turbmes, and plpmg. It can, however, provide the highest specific impulse for a given
propellant combination.
The Space Shuttle's main engine uses a variation of the topping cycle by employing
two separate precombustion chambers, each mounted directly on a separate main
turbopump. The oxygen precombustor and turbopump burn an oxygen-rich mixture
that expands through the oxidizer turbine to drive the pump. Then the mixture enters
the main combustion chamber, where it burns with the fuel-rich mixture from the fuelp~ombust~ ~d turbine assembly. The Space Shuttle's main engine develops the
highest specific Impulse (455 sec at vacuum) of any flight-proven rocket engine using
chemical propulsion.
. The expander cycle is somewhat different, in that the engine pump turbines are
driven by gaseous fuel which vaporizes in the thrust chamber cooling jacket The
expander cycle requires no precombustor. An expander cycle engine is shown in
Fig. 17-4.

Types of Rockets

17.3

Liquid MonopropelJant Engines. By fa.: the most widely used ~ of propulsion
for spacecraft attitude and velocity control IS monopropellant hydrazine (N2~?' Its
xcellent handling characteristics, relative stability under normal storage conditions,
e d clean decomposition products have made it the standard. The general sequence of
~perations in a hydrazine thruster (Fig. 17-5) is:
• When the attitude-control system signals for thruster operation, an electricsolenoid valve opens, allowing hydrazine to flow. This action may be pulsed
(as short as 5 ms) or long duration (steady state).
• The pressure in the propellant tank forces liquid hydrazine into the injector. It
enters as a spray into the thrust chamber and contacts the catalyst beds.
• The catalyst bed consists of alumina pellets impregnated with iridium. The
most widely uSed catalyst, manufactured by Shell Oil Company, is called S~ll
405. Incoming liquid hydrazine heats to its vaporizing point by contact With
the catalyst bed and with the hot gases leaving the catalyst p.articles. The !e.mperature of the hydrazine rises .to a poi~t where the rate o.f ~ts decompoSition
becomes so high that the chemIcal reactions are self-sustaimng.
• By controlling the flow variables and the geometry of the catalyst chamber, a
designer can tailor the proportion of chemical products, the ~xhaust ter.n~­
ture, the molecular weight, and thus the enthalpy for a ~ven application
(Fig. 17-5). For a thruster application where s~cifi~ im~ul~e IS par:un~unt, the
designer attempts to provide 3(}-4()% ammoma diSSOCiation, which IS about
the lowest percentage that can be maintained reliably. Fo~ a gas-gene.rator
application, where lower temperature gases are usually deSired, the designer
provides for higher levels of ammonia dissociation.
• Finally, in the space thruster, the hydrazine decomposition p~oduc~ leave the
catalyst bed and exit from the chamber through a high expansIOn ratio exhaust
nozzle to produce thrust.

Injector

DlstribuIIon Upper

Uquid Oxygen . .

Element

catalyst

Seal

Lower Catalyst
(SheD 405) Bed

MW-ll.5-15Ib1MOLE

Liqu!d Hydrogen"

Nozzle

Rg. 17-5. TypIcal Hydrazlne (NaH.u Rocket Engine.
Fuel Coolant

Passage

Fig. 17-4. RUO Expander Power Cycle. 16,500 Ibr thrust engine used for the Centaur LO:zllH2
upper stage.

Figure 17-6 shows a schematic of the monopropellant-hydraz~ne .system.used for
the ORO spacecraft. One of the largest hydrazine systems ever bUllt, It con~ns aJ:>out
1,800 kg of hydrazine, and is the first such system designed to be refueled In orbit. It

698

Space Propulsion Systems

17.3

operates in a blowdown mode. For this operation, the propellant and pressmant gas are
stored in the same tank. As propellant is expelled from the tank, the pressure level
~. The system has eight thrusters operating at a maximum thrust of 30 N for reactiO~ control and fo~ thrusters operating at a maximum thrust of 535 N to adjust the
orbIt and control altitude. Both sets of hydrazine thrusters are completely redundant
for all functions. Both use Shell 405 catalyst and operate as described above. The system also has four large positive-expulsion tanks with elastomeric diaphragms each
holding about 450 kg of hydrazine.
'

699

Types of Rockets

17.3

17.3.2 Solid Rockets
Solid rockets store propellants in solid form. The fuel is typically powdered
aluminum. and the oxidizer is ammonium perchlorate. A synthetic rubber SUCh. as
lybutadiene holds the fuel and oxidizer powders together. Though lower perfomnn~

:n

liquid rockets, the operational simplicity of a solid rocket. motor often makes !t
the propulsion system of choice. Table 17-7 gives representative examples of solid
rocket motors.

TABLE 17-7. Representative Sond Rocket Motors. The firm UnHed Technologies/Chemical
Systems Division suppfies the IUS SRM-1 and 2, as well as the current MinuteMan
third-stage motor version of Leasat PKM. Thlokol Corp. suppUes the STAR rocket
motors as well as the LEASAT PKM.
r-

Pro-

Motor

2P~-+-I

2R0---J--l
3P0--4--l
3R
4P

O--+-+--H
o---+-...J

4R
Bank2

I
'
'
,
L_______ J

i '

I~~~I
Fig. 17-&. GRO Propulsion System Schematic. Monopropellant hydrazlne fuel. Blowdown fuel
system going from 400 to 100 psia tank pressure.

The system is completely two-fault tolerant (a Space Shuttle launch safety requirement) and therefore has three solenoid-latching isolation valves in series for every
flow "leg" (between tanks and anyone thruster) for a total of 18 latching isolation
valves. They are called latching valves because they stay in whatever position they
were last commanded (that is, open or closed), therefore only requiring power for the
command period of approximately 200 ms. The system also has eight manual fill-anddrain valves. Each tank has one propellant and one gas valve to load the hydrazine and
ON2 pressurizing gas on their respective sides of the positive-expulsion tank. The
ORO propulsion system also has miscellaneous components such as filters (to keep
from c?ntaminating the system), pressure transducers, temperature sensors, and thermostatically controlled catalyst bed and line heaters. These heaters increase thruster
lifetime and prevent the propellant from freezing.

Avg.
Loaded pelJant
Weight Mass Thrust
Fraction
(kg)
(I"')

Avg.
Thrust

(N)

Max.

EffectIve

Thrust
(N)

Isp
,(sec)

260,4sa

295.5

Flown

Status

IUSSRM-1
(ORBU5-21)

2.81 x 107

10,374

0.94

44,610 198,435

LEASATPKM

9.26 x 106

3,658

0.91

35,375 157,356 193,200 285.4

Rown
Flown

STAR48A

6.78 x 106

2,559

0.95

17,900

79,623 100,085 283.9

STAR 48B(S)

5.67 x 106

2,135

0.95

14,845

66,034

70,504 286.2' QuaIIflecI

STAR 48B(L)

5.79 x 106

2,141

0.95

15,160

67,435

72,017 292.2

7.12x 106

2,459

STAR 62
STAR 75

2.13 x 107

8,066

0.93

44,608 198,426 242,846

Qualified

293.5

In develop.

286.0

In develop.

80,157 111,072 303.8

Rown

IU5SRM-2
(ORBU5-6)

8.11 x 106

2,995

0.91

18,020

STAR13B

1.16x 10S

47

0.88

1,577

7,015

285.7

Rown

32,027 292.0

Flown

---------,

OrbIt
AdjusI ,
Thruster'

Module

Total
Impulse
(Nos)

9,608

STAR30BP

1.48 x 106

543

0.94

5,960

26,511

STAR30C

1.65 x 106

626

0.95

7,140

31,760

37,031

284.6

Rown

STAR30E

1.78 x 106

667

0.94

7,910

35,185

40,990

289.2

Flown

3.02 x 106

1,149

0.94

9,911

44,086

49,153

291.0

Rown

STAR37F

Figure 17-7 is a schematic diagram of a typical rocket ID<?tor usi~g a so~i~ propellant. This motor used for geosynchronous spacecraft, proVIdes a crrcularIZlDg burn
when the spac~ is at apogee, thus placing the vehicle into its operating ?I'bit. ~
internal grain is shaped in a star configuration, so the grain's surface area Will remam
because
relatively constant as the motor burns. We often desire a constant burning
it produces relatively constant pressure (and thrust) over the full bum period for a predominantly radial burning motor. An igniter in the forward or head end of the m~tor
starts the burn on command from a control system. The igniter, when lit, sends burnmg
particles into the main motor grain. These burning particles fully ignite the rocket
motor. A solid motor typically operates with a single start and burns until the propellant is gone [TImDat, 1987].

:u-ea

17.3.3 Hybrld Rockets
A hybrid rocket is one in which the propellants are stored in different f~. Normally, the fuel is a solid and the oxidizer is a liquid or gas (Fig. 17-8). Hybrid rockets

700

Space PropoJsion Systems

- ......-....

17.3

~"""

ExIICone

Nozzfa

Closure

Types of Rockets

17.3

701

oNERA in France developed a hybrid sounding rocket using amine fuel and nitric
acid oxidizer. The 3.3-m long, 75-kg rocket first flew in 1964. These flights continued
for three years, ultimately reachin~ altitudes in ex~ of 100 km [Salmo~ 1968.1. At
the same time, United Technologtes and Beach Aircraft developed a high~altitude
supersonic target drone using HTPB (hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene) fuel ~d
IRFNA (inhibited red fuming nitric acid) oxidizer. This air-launched Sandpiper JDlSsUe (later renamed HAST) first flew in 1968 and had a range in excess of 150 km
[Altman, 1981].
Hybrid rocket technology has progressed slowly since the 1960s. As of 1990,
engines With thrust levels of75,000 lbf have been demonstrated in ground tests [Gu~­
rie and Wolf, 1990]. Engines with thrust of 3,000,000 lbr have been proposed, but SIgnificant technical hurdles remain before such large hybrids will be feasible [Jensen,
1990]. Table 17-8 gives chamcteristics of sevemI hybrid rockets.
TABLE 17-8. Representative Hybrid Rockets.
Average

Nozzle Throat

Thrust

Fig. 17-7. Typical Solid Propellant Rocket Motor. ETA is the Explosive Transfer Assembly.

Average

Thrust

(Ibt)

Motor

(leN)

Bum
Duration
(sec)

Fuel

OxIdizer

HTPB
HTPB
HTPB
HTPB
HTPB

lOx
lOx
lOx
lOx
lOx

HTPB

IRFNA

Comments

American Rocket Company

have several attractive features. These include: (1) safety-it is impossible to create
an explosive mixture of fuel and oxidizer; (2) throttling-we can throttle the engine
by modulating the oxidizer flow mte (useful for load alleviation during maximum
dynamic pressure and for trajectory shaping). We can idle the engine also (10% thrust)
to ensure system operation prior to launch commit; (3) restart-we can shut it off and
restart it; (4) storability-the fuel is stomble, as are many oxidizers; (5) environmentally clean-unlike solid rockets, hybrids can be made which produce no hydrochloric
acid or aluminum oxide exhaust.

H-SOO

7S,ooo

333

H-2S0

32,000

142

H·50

10,000

44

U-50

6,500

29

100

0.44

U-1

I

Gas Generator

In development
In development
In development

178

300

Aown on Flrebolt airlaunched target drone,

StarsTruck

Fuel

ff~r~))~~ ;Ql)) c(J
ReUefVent

In development

1968

Combustfon
Chamber
MaIn Valve

/lnjec1or

Qualified for flight

United Techno/ogles
40,000

Oxfdlzer Tank

70

T

AD Drain

40,000

178

CTBN

lOx

Aown on Dolphin waterlaunched sounding
rocket, 1984

HTPB

GOx

Aown on 40ft tall rocket
for student project. 1991

USAF Academy
H-1

55

0.25

I

2.3

Nozzle

17.3.4 Electric Propulsion
Flg.17-8.

Schematic DraWing of a Hybrid Rocket.

The California Rocket Society built hybrid rockets in the 1930s. The Californiabased Pacific Rocket Society also conducted research in the mid-1940s, using liquid
oxygen with various fuels including wood, wax loaded with carbon black, and rubber.
The LOX-rubber combination was the most successful, and was test-flown to an
altitude of9 km in June, 1951 [Altman, 1981].
"

Electric propulsion uses externally provided electrical power either from the Sun
(converted through photovoltaic solar armys-lOO% to date) or from nuclear or
thermodynamic conversion thermal engines, to accelemte the working fluid to
produce useful thrust. For example, in an ion engine, an electric field accelerates
charged'particles which exit at high velocity. Alternatively, in a magnetoplasmadynamic, or MPD thruster, a current-carrying plasma intemcts with a magnetic field
resulting in a Lorentz acceleration to expel the plasma.

702

i

1
I

Space Propulsion Systems

17.3

There is no fundamental limit (other than the speed of light) to the exhaust velocity
that we can obtain with an ~lectric rocket However, the power required may grow to
the point where further acceleration is pointless. There is therefore an optimum
exhaust velocity, and hence an optimum specific impulse, which depends largely on
the electric power sl,lbsystem [Stuhlinger, 1964].
The propulsion system weight varies with the Specific impulse (exhaust velocity),
thrust level, and total impulse. Propellant weight clearly drops off as specific impulse
increases. The power source requirements, however, are proportional to Isp. Thus, the
weight of the power source increases with specific impulse, leading to a minimuni
weight of the combined system (fuel and power source) at a particular value of Isp- We
may usually obtain cost savings by operating slightly below the optimum specific
impulse, since propellant is usually cheaper than more power supply.
For an electric propulsion device, efficiency is defined as the ratio ofldnetic energy
expelled to the input energy. For small time intervals, where mass flow is constant, we
express efficiency, TJ, as a power ratio:
-

mv2

TJ= 2P

~

= FIspg
2mTJ
2TJ

Electrothermal

Mechanism

• Gas heated via
resistance element or
arc and expanded
through nozzle
• ResistoJets
• Arciets

power
specific
Impulse, Isp
TABLE 17-10.

Concept
Resistojet

50kW-1 MW

30Q-8O() sec

1,000-3,000 sec

2,000-5,000 sec

(sec)

Input
Power,
(kW)

Characteristics
Specific
Power,
Mass,
(mNlkW) (kg/kW) Propellant

Thrust!

Supplier

296

0.5

743

1.6

N2H4

299

0.9

905

1

N2H4

Prlmex,TRW

480

0.85

135

3.5

NH3

IRSIITT

502

The five electric propulsion (EP) concepts shown on Tables 17-9 and 17-10 have
achieved operational status and many programs are underway to increase the number
and types of missions served by EP. The following will briefly highlight the characteristics of mature EP systems that have become operational, or for which nearterm flight programs are firmly planned, and comment on the potentials of various
classes of EP systems. Table 17-9 illustrates the three basic types of electrical energy
thrusters. Table 17-10 and Fig. 17-9 show key characteristiCs of selected, mature EP
systems. Figure 17-10 illustrates the fundamental concepts that enable operations for
. alI electric propulsion systems. To mitigate the effects of mission specifics, the system
specific mass (in kglkW) only includes the mass of the thruster and power processor.
(The masses of the propellant subsystem, gimbals, and other mission specifics are not
included.)
Resistojets have been used for North-South sta~onkeeping and orbit insertion of,
respectively, communications satellites in the United States and for orbit control and
ACS functions on Russian spacecraft. Propellant temperatures are fundamentalIy
determined by material limits in resistojets which implies modest (propellant specific)
maxima for specific impulses of about 300 sec for the 0.5-1 kW-class resistojets

• Ions .
• Plasma accelerated via
electrostatically
interaction of current and
accelerated
magnetic field
• Hall effect (HET) • Pulsed plasma (PPTs)
• Magnetoplasmadynamlc
• Ion
(MPD)
• Reid emission
• Pulsed inductive (PIT)
1-50kW

>580
BOO

1.8

138

3.1

~H4

Prlmex

113

2.5

N~4

Prlmex

NH3
Teflon
Teflon

TRW, Prlmex, CTA

26'

847
1,200

<O.03t
<O.02t

Hal/Effect
Thruster (HET)

1,600

1,638

1.5
1.4"
4.5
0.5
0.74
0.6
2.5
0.6

2,042
2,585
2,906
3,250
3,2BO
3,400

Primex

2.17

PulsedPlasma
ThtuSter (PPT)

Ion Thruster
(IT)

Electromagnetic

Characteristics of Selected Electric Propulsion flight Systems.

Arcjet

Electric Propu1sion Systems Design Concepts

Electrostatic

0.4-2kW

Specific
Impulse,

(17-13)

For a given IS]). and thrust, we use Eq. (17-13) to estimate power and mass flow rate
of the working fluid. Typical values of TJ are included in Table 17-4, which also
includes useful information on selected propellants and energy sources. See Sec. 11.4
for more on the power subsystem, or Clark [1975].

703

TABLE 17-9. Electric Propulsion; Three Classes of Accelerator Concepts.

(17-12)

where TJ is the overall efficiency, mis mass flow rate, v is exhaust velocity, and P is
the input power. Recognizing that thrust F = mv, and that specific impulse Isp =
F/mg, where g is the gravitational constant, we rearrange Eq. (17-12) to get power
required:

P=

Types of Rockets

17.3

20.8
16.1
55

195

as
7

-

-

54.3
35.6
37.3

23.6

30
41
25.6

6
22
25
9.1
23.7

Xenon
Xenon

JHUlAPL
Prlmex, TSNIlMASH,
NASA
1ST, Loral, Fakel
TSNIlMASH,NASA

Xenon
Xenon
Xenon
Xenon
Xenon
Xenon

SPI, KeRC
HAC
MElCO, Toshiba
MMS
HAC, NASA
DASA

, Thruster Input power.

t Power dependent on pulse rate.

developed by Primex. Resistojets have several desirable fea~ includi~g v~ues of
thrust/power far higher than other EP options (due to thea .high. effiCIenCIes and
modest specific impulses), the lowest EP system dry mass~ (pnmanly due to the~
of a requirement for a power Pf?Cessor), B?d uncharged/bemgn plumes. These.fea.
will continue to make resistoJets attractIve for low-to-modest energy ~ppbcations,
especialIy where power limits and/or thrusting times, a~d/or p!ume Impacts are
mission drivers. In addition, resistojets can operate on a WIde vanety of propellants
which led to their proposed use as a propulsion/waste. g~ ~agement concept on
Space Station and, operated on hydrogen, for Earth-orblt msertions.

704

Space Propulsion Systems

<>

200

':1

17.3

Types of Rockets

17.3

705

<>

i"30
~ 25

V

120

V

Vv

Q

i

III

'5
10

A

5

Q)1JtJ

0
0

500

1,000

1,500

A
2,000

2,500

3,000

3,500

Specific Impulse (sec)

-':£
~

.
;

g

~co

0

• Electric Propulsion Converts Power and Propellant to Thrust
System Conveniently Divided Into Three Subsystems

EPConcept

- Power
- Thrust
- Propellant

o~

~

0

150

[§l

o

PPT
HEr
ION

Rg.17-10.

Generic Electric PropulsIon System. Functional Block Diagram •

100

E!

t:

50

V

5
0
0

500

1,000

1,500

2,000

2,500

3,000

3,500

Specific Impulse (sec)

Rg.17-9. Key Characteristics of Malura Electric PropulsIon Systems. (A) Specific Mass,
and (8) ThrustlPower.

Table 17~10 shows three low-power arcjets. The two hydrazine concepts are produced by Primex and are being used for stationkeeping. The ammonia version was
supplied b~ the Institut fur Raumf~ Systeme and the Institut fur Thennodynamik
?Dd.Ta:hnische Gebaudeausrustung m Germany and will be used for orbit raising and
mc~ti~n change of a German amateur radio spacecraft. Arcjets have about twice the
spectfic lDlpulse of resistojets while maintaining some desirable features such as use
of standard propellants and relatively low dry masses. The increased specific impulse, "
coupled with relatively low efficiencies of about 0.3 to 0.4, lead to significant
decreases (> 6X) of thrustIpower relative to resistojets. In addition, as complex
plas~~ phen~menamus~ be controlled, arcjets require relatively complex power
conditiorung which results m dry masses about twice those of resistojet systems.

Significant efforts including development of novel materials were necessary to define
and validate the 600-sec, hydrazine arcjet.1t is likely, therefore, that 600-650 sec represents the upper range of specific impulses that can be expected of low-power arcjets
using storable propellants. Arcjets do provide major mass benefits for many spacecraft, are relatively simple to integrate, and are the least complex and costly of any
plasma propulsion device. For those reasons, low-power arcjets can be eXPa:ted to
undergo evolutionary improvements and be used well into the future for a vanety of
medium-ta-high energy propulsion functions. Figure 17-11 also shows a 26 kW,
ammonia arcjet which operates at a specific impulse of 800 sec. The arcjet is part of a
flight system called ESEX, built under a U.S. Air Force program by a TRW, ~x,
and crA Systems team, which includes the arcjet, supporting subsystems, and a diagnostic suite to evaluate plume and EMI effects. The increased specific impulse relative
to low-power arcjets is largely due to reduction of losses associated with low Reynolds
number flows that are fundamental penalties for low-power arcjets. The space test will
represent a greater than tenfold increase in power level of flight-demonstrated EP
devices and will address integration and mission issues critical to potential users of
bigh-power (orbit-transfer-class) electric propulsion.
Pulsed plasma thrusters (PPfs) are inherently pulsed devices and versions w~ch
operate at about 847 sec specific impulse and were built by the Johns Hopkins
University, Applied Physics Laboratory (JHU/APL) have successfully maintained
precision control of three NOVA spacecraft for many years. PPfs feature very small
G; 4 x l()-4N·s) impulse bit capability, use of a solid propellant (Teflon), and the
ability to operate at near constant performance over large power ranges. An improved

706

Space Propulsion Systems

173

Types of Rockets

17.3

700

15kW-class HETs traceable to the Fakel concept. are planned to provide stationkeep-

~g for nine years on the French Stentor spacecraft. Table 17-11 summarizes the status
ofHETs.
TABLE 17-11. Hall Effect Thruster (HET) Status Summary.

r

Power

Concept

Supplier

SPT-1oo Fakel
(Russia)

(kW)
1.35

DemoUfe
T
'sp
(sec) (mN)
(Khrs)
1,500

83

>5.7

Maturity

Comment

Flight

Most mature
1.5 kW-c1ass
concept Multiple
rife tests >5 Khrs

0-55

TsNIlMASH
(Russia)

1.39' 1,638

88.6

0.64

Under
Several technical
Development delfferences
from SPT-100

T-1oo

KeRC
(Russia)

1.29

1,650

80

0.63

Under
Nearly Identical
Development toSPT-1oo

3.0
5.0

1,579 1n
1,929 263

SPT-14O Fakel
(Russia)
0-100

TsNIlMASH

3.0

1,849 184

T-160E,
T-14O,

KeRC
SPI (USA)

3.0
4.3

1,772 192
1,909 257

T-2OO

--

Under
Operated from
Development 1.5to5 kW
Under
Development
Under
New high fidelity
Development data from NASA

FIg. 17-11. The 26 kW, ESEX ArcJet System.

version PPr which operates up to 1,200 sec specific impulse (Table 17-9), is being
developed by a NASAlPrimex team and a flight test in 1999 is planned on the Earth
Observer 1 spacecraft to demonstrate propulsive ACS. The characteristics of PPrs
will likely limit their power operating range to under a few hundred watts and, as suggested by Table 17-10, they have large dry masses. Within their operating capability,
however, PPrs promise a combination of low-power, high specific impulse, and
small-impulse bit that is unique. It is anticipated that PPrs will find uses for ACS and
~or .m~est energy !!.V applications for small spacecraft where the power and thrust
limitations of PPfs are acceptable and/or desirable.
Hall effect thrusters (BETs) and ion thrusters (ITs) represent the highest perfor~ance EP options and characteristics of mature versions of both concepts are shown
m Tabl~ 17-1 O. ~s were developed and flown on dozens of Russian space missions
for vanous functions and are under intense development for use on other nations'
spacecraft. Flight-type HErs have been produced by Fakel Enterprise (Fakel), Keldysh Research Center (KeRC), and TSNIIMASH, all of Russia. and quite aggressive
HEr R&D programs are in place in Europe, Japan, and the U.S. Table 17-10 lists three
HEr concepts to ill~trate the state-of-the-art. The 1,600 sec specific impulse concept
was developed to flight ready status by a team including International Space Technology, ~c., Loral, and Fakel; the 1,638 sec Isp device was built. qualified, and delivered
for flight test (at reduced levels of power and specific impulse) by a NASA, Primex,
TSNlIMASH team; and the high power HEr is being built by Space Power Inc. and
KeRC for a 1999 flight test on a Russian GEOSAT. In addition, two versions of

Five mature ion thrusters are also shown on Table 17-10. The 2,585 sec Isp system
was built by the Hughes Aircraft Company and is operational on a commercial
COMSAT launched in 1997. The 2,906 sec Isp concept was built by a team of Mitsubishi Electric Corporation and Toshiba Corporation of Japan and was flown on the
ETS-VJ spacecraft in 1994. An orbit insertion issue prevented the system from
performing its planned stationkeeping function but in-space characterizations were
performed in 1995 and an identical system will soon be flown on the Japanese
COMETS spacecraft. The 3,250 and 3,400 sec Isp systems were bUilt in Europe by
teams headed by, respectively, Matra Marconi Space (MMS) and DASA. These devices have been baselined for stationkeeping on the European Space Agency's
Artemis spacecraft to be launched in 2000. The 3,280 sec, 2.5 kW device is the highest
power, mature ion thruster for which data is available and is used on NASA's New
Millennium DS-l mission.
HETs and ITs are the highest specific impulse options available for mission
pllQlIlers, and many analyses have been conducted to evaluate their use for high energy
missions. Comparisons of the two devices are difficult due to the relative lack of
maturity of devices built to comparable powers and standards. ITs operate reliably at
higher specific impulses than HETs and their performance and specific mass are
deeply penalized by operation at specific impulses less than about 2,500 sec, due to
the constraints imposed by the ion optics systems. On the other hand, HET systems
perform at values of thrust/power 30% or more larger than those of ITs and are considerably lighter but HET operations above about 2,500 sec will pose major lifetime.
or redesign challenges. Both concepts eject high-velocity, charged plumes and present

Space Propulsion Systems

708
I

I•

II
I

17.4

approximately the same issues regarding spacecraft integration.·Both HETs and ITs
provide extreme benefits for emerging space missions and the choice between them
will likely be. quite mission specific. In general, however, ITs become increasingly
beneficial as mission energies increase and HETs appear optimum for many timeconstrained situations, typical of Earth-space missions.

i

i

17.4 Component Selection and Sizing
The simplest way to feed the propellant (or working fluid) to the thrust chamber on
demand is to displace it from its storage vessels with a high-pressure gas. Alternative
systems employ a pump, such as a piston or turboptimp, which can be driven by turbines, gas pressure intensifiers, or directly by electric motors. Turbine-driven pump
assemblies may obtain drive power either from a hot-gas cycle (the most common
method) or, in a few cases, from electromechanical actuators that in tum receive power
from batteries or solar arrays. A feed system using intensified gas pressure may soon
find application in propulsion systems.
We typically use pressure-fed systems for rockets which deliver low to moderate
levels of thrust and total impulse (see Fig. 17-12). The simplified propellant feed
system reduces the overall weight of the propulsion systems. This simplicity, often
resulting in increased reliability, is particularly attractive for spacecraft applications.
However, as total impulse and/or thrust requirements increase, the weight of the
propellant tanks may become prohibitive. This is because the propellant tanks for a
pressure-fed system have to withstand a pressure somewhat higher than the engine
combustion pressure, thus they tend to be heavier than those for pump-fed systems.
Pump-fed systems are definitely lighter for applications using high thrust and longer
total burn, such as for launch vehicles or large upper stages [Fritz and Sackheim,
1982]. Because of these variables, we must conduct design studies and trade-offs to
select the best propellant feed approach. The next section includes schematic diagrams
of typical liquid-propulsion systems using pressure or pump-fed systems. Sutton
[1992] provides a more detailed discussion of turbopump assemblies.
Regulated System

Component Selection and Sizing

17.4

For gas storage systems, only the pressure vessel, valving, and feed plumbing are

equired to direct the gaseous propellants under high pressure to the thrust chamber.

Lquid storage systems are more complex, needing to manage ~e liquid propellant
under zero gravity to ensure that liquid, rather than g~ o~ vapor,. 18 .expelled from ~e
tank. To manage the liquid propellant, we may use artificial gravIty ~duced by ~ spming spacecraft or by a settling bum from another small rocke~ poSItive expulsion, or
: surface-tension device. Positive expulsion systems use an active element (a bla~c:r,
diaphragm, piston, or bellows) to separate the press~t gas from the. liqwd
propellants un~er all dyn~c condi~ons ~d to fo~e the liqwd from.the tank mto the
reed lines on demand. The shghtly higher differential gas pr~sure. acting .on the ex'p~­
sion device forces the liquid to flow. Table 17-12 shows basIC options usmg a poSItive
expulsion tank.

=

TABLE 17-12. Available Options for Positive expulsion Tanks. llP pressure dlfference.
After deciding that our spacecraft requires a liquid propulsion system, we must
decide on system characteristics.
Tank Option
Metal Diaphragm

Advantages
• High volume
efficiency

• Good center of
gravity control
• No ullage volume

Rolling Diaphragm

• Ught weight
• Low cost
• Low llP during
expulsion

Piston

Blowdown System

~200to-------.._

300psia

:ryplcal Pressure
Blowdown AaIfo:
300 to 400 psIa
(BegfrmIng of life)
to -100 psIa (End
of life)

Rubber Diaphragm

• Extensive database
• Low llP during
expulsion

• Compatibility limits
on propeUants

• Upper stages
• Missiles

• High acceleration
missDes

• Spacecraft control &
maneuvering
• Launch vehicles
• Upper stages

• Not cycle limited
• Proven design
• High expulsion
efficiency
Metal Bellows

• No sOding seals

• High weight

• Good center of

• High cost
• Umited cycle
capability

gravity control

• Good compatibility
Pressurization Systems.

• Launch vehicles

• Sliding seals
possible blowby

• Proven design
Rg.17-12.

Typical Applications
• Spacecraft control &
maneuvering

• Inspection of internal • Missile interceptors
welds
• Maneuvering
mlssites

• High cost
• Low volumetric
efficiency
• Design adapts easily • Critical tolerance on
shell
to growth

FDJ

Relief
\IaIve

• High cost
• High-expulsion llP
• Optimizes only for
special envelope

• Extensive database
• Low llP during
expulsion

\IaIve

"--~.r

Disadvantages
• High weight

• No sliding seals
• Proven design

Typically 3,000 to

6,000 psIa

709

• Hermetically sealed

• Low volumetric
efficiency

• Missiles
• Spacecraft
• Launch vehicles

r

I

f

710

Space Propulsion Systems

17.4

Surface tension systems passively manage propellants in a near zero-gravity
environment by using vanes, screens, or sponges to wick the propellant into the
propellant-tank outlets. In this manner the presswizing gas bubble is always maintained in the center of the tank. All of these devices rely on surface tension forces to
separate liquids from gases [Martin, 1986].
Depending upon the specific mission requirements, a spacecraft can employ from
a few to as many as 30 thrust units. These thrusters may have to generate long, steadystate burns for velocity control maneuvers to adjust or maintain the orbit. They may
also fire in short pulses of several milliseconds each to control attitude and manage
momentum; In some applications, an attitude-eontrol thruster may have to deliver in
excess of a million pulses over its lifetime. This wide range of operating conditions
places great demands on propulsion systems that control the attitude and velocity of
spacecraft. Thus, designers of these thrusters place at least as much emphasis on oper_
ating life as on performance. In fact, in some cases absolute performance is secondary
to requirements for extended lifetimes and reliability. Table 17-13 presents operating
and performance specifications for typical flight-qualified attitude and velocity control thrusters.
Some means of directing the thrust vector may be required to ensure that the thrust
vector points through the spacecraft's center of mass. This system must account for
center-of-mass shifts as propellant burns and allow for necessary manufacturing tolerances. If the disturbance torques resulting from a misaligned thrust vector are small,
the spacecraft's reaction-control system (that is, pulsing thrusters) can overcome them.
In other cases, the entire vehicle may be spun intentionally during firings of the main
engine to cancel out any misalignment of rocket thrust. If not, we may gimbal the large
rocket or only its nozzle. Alternatively, several rocket clusters may provide the main
thrust, with opposing rockets turned Qff briefly to compensate for the disturbance
torques. Similarly, we can use a rocket engine's shallow-throttling ability to modulate
its disturbances relative to any opposing rocket in the cluster.
Other techniques for thrust-vector control, such as exhaust-jet deflectors (vanes or
tabs), are not as common as the ones mentioned abov~ for exoatmospheric use.
Table 17-14 lists some representative values for the range of control authority that we
can achieve with various techniques for controlling the thrust vector.
To design a propulsion system, we must analyze requirements, trade off design
features, and size the system iteratively until we arrive at the best configuration for a
particular mission. Analyzing requirements includes performance, interfaces, and
physical characteristics. Design trades investigate different types of propulsion
systems, selection criteria, and design factors for the specific mission. Using sizing
calculations, interface considerations, and safety criteria, we determine the types and
quantities of propellants and pressurants, as well as how to configure the tanks. components. instrumentation. and power conditioning (if applicable). All choices must
meet design requirements within suitable margins.
The total impulse that the propulsion system must deliver derives from the velocity
increment (.£\V) it must impart to the spacecraft for maneuvers. the impulse required
by the attitude-control system for limit cycling and managing momentum, and the
spacecraft's weight. The allowable offset for center-of-mass affects the number and
location of propellant tanks (or solid rockets), which usually occupy most of the pr0pulsion system's volume. The ranges for maximum acceleration establish criteria for
thruster sizing. whereas duty cycling determines the type, response time. and operating
thermal characteristics .of thrusters. Lifetime affects component selections. For

Component Selection and Sizing

17.4
TABLE 17·13.

711

F1lght-Quallfled Thrusters Used to Control Spacecraft Attftude and VelocIty Thruster life is expressed in terms of total impulse or number of pulses.
IspRange
Total
Impulse
(11)3 N·s)

(sec)

(N)

Nom.
Thrust
(I.,,)

0.090.22-

0.020.05

MonoH

TRW, OlinIRRC
ERNO, Marquardt,
HAC

4-200

205-215 110-180 0.1-0.2

0.090.67

0.020.150

MonoHt

TRW, OlinlRRC

90-800

285-320 250-290 0.5-0.9

2.22

0.5

MonoH

ODnlRRC, Marquardt

40-200

215-230 120-200 0.1-0.2

4.45

1.0

MonoH

TRW,SEP, HAC,
40-1,100 210-230 120-210 0.1-0.2
Marquardt, ODnlRRC

13-18

3-4

MonoH

TRW; SEP, ERNO

40-1,100 215-235 150-210 0.2-0.3

22-36

5-8

MonoH

TRW,OnnIRRC,
Marquardt, HAC

40-1,100 215-240 120-210 0.2-0.3

Nom.
Thrust

Propellants"

Developers

Steady

State

305-325

WeIght

Pulset

(kg)

2

16-SO

4-11

Bimodal

TRW (SCAT)

2.3 xlOS

45-67

10-15

MonoH

Marquardt, TRW

40-1,300 215-240 120-210 0.3-0.5

310

111

25

MonoH

OlinlRRC

40-400

215-240 150-220 1.5-1.6

133

30

MonoH

Marquardt

40-300

225-242 150-225

178-222

40-50

MonoH

OIlnlRRC, TRW

40-200

220-245 150-220 1.4-1.8

~ 100-155 MonoH

2-3

onnl RRC, Marquardt

1,100

~245

2,200

225-245 150-225

11.3

~240

NfA

8.2

1,335

300

MonoH

Walter Kidde,
OnnIRRC

2,669

600

MonoH

OnnIRRC

200
200

150-225 1.8-2.3

11

2.5

N20JMMH

MMB

285

210

0.5

22

5.0

N20JMMH

Marquardt, ARCILPG 200-400

290

220

0.7

111

25.0

N20 4IMMH

Marquardt

1,100

300

220

1.4

90-110 N20 4IMMH

ARCILPG

9,000

308

NfA

4.1

400-489
450

100

~OJMMH

MBB

7,000

305

NfA

4.5

440

105

N~JMMH

TRW

11,000

325

NfA

4.5

NfA

3.8

450

110

N20JMMH

Marquardt

900

309

445

105

N20~~4

TRW

10,000

322

NfA

4.5

440

105

N2OiN2H4

TRW

10,000

330

NfA

5.5

450

110

N2041N~4

Royal Ordnance

7,000

317

NfA

4

" Mono His monopropeDant hydrazine (N2H4) and MMH IS monomethyl hydrazlne.
d
For low duty cycles «l OOA0) andreatshort ~anUI~= J:-~ ~g~e~~I= ~:er pulsed Isp- For uty
er.
"
cycles ,>1001. and purse widths 9
:j: ElectrothermalJy augmented (resistojetJ EHT)

t

Space Propulsion Systems

712

17.4

TABLE 17-14. Representative Control-Authority Ranges for Some Typical Ways to Control the Thrust Vector.
Typical Control Authority Range

Method
Gimbals

.z7deg

Off-pulslng

20 to 40% of thrust

Shallow Throttllng

.z10 to 20% of thrust

Exhaust jet Deflectors
Qet tabs andJet vanes)

.z10 deg

RCS Thruster Control

Full range of atlltude-control rates as determined by
thrust level, moment arm (torque), and duty cycle

Component Selection and Sizing

(17-14)

where It is total impul~, Isp is the specific impulse, and g is the universal gravity constant 32.~ 7. fils 2. KnoWIng the propellant mass, we can determine the propellant volume by diVIding by propellant density. For gaseous propellant, density should be at the
storag~ pressure and maximum anticipated tempereture.
Besl~ expelled propellant mass, many other things contribute to the weight of
pr~pulsl?n syste~. Some examples are thrusters, tanks, fluid components, instrumentation, lines, fittings, power conditioning equipment, dedicated power equipment,
pressurant, ~d residual propellants (depending upon propulsion type). Initial sizing
should ~e tn!oacco~t knoWll hardware weights. Table 17-13 summarizes some repn:sentative! fllght-qualified, spacecraft thrusters. We should use similar data to select
fllght-qual~ed, off-~e-shelfhardware that are close to meeting mission requirements.
A sc~ematic or functional block diagmm (see Sec. 17.2) builds on the basic concept
and SIze, as do the equipment list and weight summary. For a conceptual design, we
may use the methods outlined below.
We usually ~ize solid propellant systems so that each motor in the system provides
the total impulse for a single maneuver..~us, we need only know the mass fraction of
each motor to calculate total system welgfit, because the weight of the other hardware
-such as the safe-and-~ devi~e, explosive tmnsfer assembly, and initiators-is
usually s~ b~ companson. SolId rocket motors are typically over 90% propellant
by mass, mcluding case and nozzle assemblies. A value from 91-94% is reasonable
for present-day solid rocket motors with total impulse greater than 450,000 N·s.

713

bnprovements in materials of construction should increase this value !<> more than
95% by the mid-1990s.
For liquid propulsion systems, we size the tank after determining the propellant
load beCause the tanks are the largest and heaviest components. For bipropellant systems, we determine the oxidizer and fuel requirements from:
OIF=mox!mtue1

example, ~ters ~ designed and qualified for specific operating lifetimes. Maintenance, or maxlIDum mterval for resupply, affects propellant loads and tank sizing
. The pro~ll~t bu~get ~ust include enough propellant to correct for errors s~m­
mmg from mJection dispersIOn. Both the number and accuracy of maneuvers affect the
rese~es that must ~ carried. ~en a .solid rocket performs a 11V maneuver, especially
~ solid rocket restricted to a smgle fmng, off-nominal performance will result in position e~ors and on-orbit velocity ~ors. For example, the Inertial Upper Stage has a
three-SIgm~ geos~chronous poSItion error of 43 kID and a velocity error of 6 mls.
. Fo~ a tyPICal desIgn, we first size ~ ~ro~~ant load based on the information pro..
~Ided m ~able 10-7 of Chap. 10. For lnItial SlZlng, we may consider only the first two
Items. Usmg the rocket equation presented in Sec. 17.2 (Eq. 17-6), we estimate the
propellant load, 11Zp. from total impulse requirements:
TT1p=It lgIsp

17.4

(17-15)

where OIF is the mixture ratio needed to deliver the required specific impulse, max is
the oxidizer mass, and '!'fu:e.l is the mass of the fuel. We calculate tank volumes from
propellant volumes loaded into each tank, plus reasonable allowances for ullage (gas
volume in the propellant tank, approximately 5%), design margin, and propellant
remaining in each tank because of tmpped liquids or uncertainties in loadin~ :md
performance. The ~~ retio is a ~tical ~ter in propulsion sy~ SlZlDg;
therefore, its selectIon IS the first step m determmmg the propellant quantities for a
given set of propulsion-system requirements .(total i~pulse). Very o~, we select the
mixture retio for system benefits other than Just maxunum I sp- COnsIder the example
of storable-bipropellant systems using N204/MMH for space systems. They almost
always use an OIF ratio of 1.64 because this value results in tanks of equal size. Eq~
sizing simplifies tank manufacturing, packaging of propulsion systems (configuration
layout), and integration.
The OIF retio at which the engine is opemting is defined as:
(17-16)
where Tit is the oxidizer mass flow rete, and Titfuel is the fuel flow rete. The
maximu;fueoretical value of the chamcteristic exhaust velocity, C·, is achieved at a
specific mixture ratio. This optimum OIF re~o depends on the. particular propellant
combination. Usually, we choose the OIF retio so that the reaction products have the
maximum achievable value of Tc 1M and thus the highest possible specific impulse
[Gordon and McBride, 1976].
In_some situations a different OIF retio results in a better overall system. For a
volume-constmined vehicle with a low density fuel such as liquid hydrogen. we can
significantly reduce vehicle size by shifting to an oxidizer-rich OIF retio. In this case,
the losses in specific impulse are more than compensated for by the reduced fuel ~­
age requirement, because combustion performance is not a particularly strong function
of mixture retio. A large orbital transfer vehicle tmnsported to orbit by the Space Shuttle would use this type of mixture retio, though there may be other situations as well.
Pressumnt gas requirements depend on the 'type of pressurization system
employed--regulated or blowdoWll (Fig.l7-12), or some combination of the two.
About 5% to 10% ullage is provided in the propellant tanks for pump-fed or regulated
pressure systems.The total propellant tank volume for a blowdoWll system is the total .
of the propellant volume, 'P, and initial gas volume, 'Vgi, in the tank. They relate
through the blowdoWll ratio, R, as follows:
(17-17)
R= VgflVgi "" [Vgi + Vp] I Vgi

where Vgf is the final gas volume, neglecting the propell~t vol~e re~ng at
end-of-life as well as density changes with tempemture. Destgn margm for liqutd pr0pellant loads depends on the mission but can be as high as 25% for early conceptual

714

Space Propulsion Systems

17.4

I

,/

d

,I

I

d~rs. ~~~ng the residual propellant can get very detailed, involving statistical

etermimstic error sources. A reasonable initial estimate is 5'*
For most systems, we can determine pressurant mass from the ~
isothermaIly (in blowdown
•
erwJse: c ating reqmrements for pressurant mass of regulated systems
=~~o:r!~ted thennodynamic~y. Using a conservation-of-energy approxo c a e pressurant mass YIelds the following relationship:
an

~~re:)h~e ~!an~s ~thdra,?

Systee:sg:I~:d::

m,. =~ [1-(;/lj) ]

(17-18)

w!ere fgi is.thethinitial pressurant mass, Pp and Vp are instantaneoUs gas pressure and
g vo ume m e propellant tank, P (300-600 psia) and P (3 000-6 000 .
instantaneous gas pressure and· ·tial g
i,
,
pSla) are
• th
T· . ..aI
1m
gas pressure m e pressurant tank, respectively.
; IS Imti ~as temperature (275-300 K); k is specific heat ratio for a
'
urant
pressurant gas
(1.40 for mtrogen, 1.67 for. helium)· and R is the
J/(kg. ~ for ~trogen, 2077.3 J/(kg. K)' for helium). press
gas constant (296.8
~ ~tion does not ~ly to very high storage pressures, for which the compressIbility factor becomes lIDportant A more complete solution and deri ti . .
Sutton [1992].
va on IS m
We may estimate the propellant and pressurant gas tank weights using:
u= p; (cylindrical)

(17-19)

and:
u=

~; (spherical)

(17-20)

where u is the allowable stress from Table 11-52· p IS· the
.
operatin
.
.
.
'
maxunum expected
the
g pressm:e, r IS the tank radius; and t IS tank wall thickness. Usually we select
material, estimate the tank size, determine the thickness from Eq (17 19)
~7-20): and then compute the tank weight using the density of the material ~l~
l:'~ ~~ca1 spac~ propulsion, the tank weight will be about 5-15% of the propel_
etght, depending on the basic design, safety factors, and construction materials
We must add 20-30% of the overall tank weight for mounting hardw
d
11·
management devices. See Sec. 11.6 for more detail
are an prope ant
We ~ estimate total weight of the liquid-prop~sion system in a similar
as for solid systems by estimating the fraction of the propul .
manner
L··
.
Slon system mass that is
propeII
an~ IqUld ~~ulslon systems are typically 85-93% propellant by mass with
the remamder consISting of pressurant, thrusters tanks fl .
'
fittin s and .
..
"
Uld compot}ents, lines,
g .'
mstrumentation. This fuel mass fraction however can be
·derabl
1ower m small systems The higher fu 1
'
,
COnsl
y
•
e mass fractions are usually assoc· ted ·th
larg~ prope~ant loads and use of composite, overwrapped tanks Th I~WI
fabncated WIth advanced materials which have high
. . ese . are
example would be thin, metal Ii ed tanks.
er strength-to-welght ratios. An
carbon fibers, such as graphite~;'xy.
usmg an overwrapping of high-strength

• Use the column labeled "Flu

=Allowable Tensile Ultimate Stress" plus a safety factor.

17.4

Component Selection and Sizing

715

A significant part of the weight in cold gas propulsion systems is in the highpressure tanks needed for storing the gaseous propellant. These systems most often
appear in applications demanding low total impulse or extreme sensitivity to
contamination. In this case~ we can estimate tank weight with the aid ofEqs. (17-19)
and (17-20). For example, the propulsion system which uses a nitrogen propellant for
the Orbital Maneuvering Unit has a TTUlSS fraction (ratio of propellant mass to propulsion system mass) of 0.64. Thirty-five percent of its dry weight is in nitrogen gas
tankage.
Thruster design requires specialized development to produce the best performance,
life, chamber pressure, and expansion ratio. Often, existing thrusters can provide a
basis for initial sizing. Sizes for fluid components (especially valves), as well as lines
and fittings, develop from flow-rate requirements, which depend on the number of
thrusters involved and the definition of specific impulse given in Sec. 17.2. Pressure
drops across fluid components also depend on flow rates. A pressure schedule starts
with requirements of the thruster's inlet pressure and works up through the pressure
drops in each sequential component to the propellant and pressmant tanks.
To design a propulsion system, we must consider some additional special topics:
interactions with the rocket exhaust plume, staging, maneuver accuracy, and thrustvector control. Rocket exhaust plumes present three basic design issues. The first is
plume heating of surfaces next to the rocket The second concenlS forces and moments
that the plume places on the spacecraft. For example, thrusters that control inclination
on geostationary satellites can lose about 10% of their delivered thrust because of
plume drag on the solar arrays. To avoid this drag, we must mount the thrusters far
from the solar array axis or cant them away from the arrays. The applied thnist vector
is then degraded by the cosine of the thruster cant angle, because the applied thmst is
no longer normal to the vehicle. A third issue concerns contamination by the plume.
Depending on the propellants involved and the nature of their exhaust products, the
plume may contaminate sensitive surfaces (such as optics or thermal control surfaces)
of both the host and nearby spacecraft, such as the Space Shuttle or, eventually, the
space station.
Rocket-plume exhauSts divide into three regions: a continuous, forward-directed
core flow; a transition region; and a rarefied bacldlow regime. By carefully placing
thrusters on the spacecraft, we can usually avoid the first two regions. Avoiding backflow effects is difficult, but we can reduce them with large separation distances, plume
shields, covers on sensitive surfaces, and operational constraints on thruster firings.
Determining plume effects in specific applications may require extensive analytical
modeling supported by selected test data [Furstenau, McCoy, and Mann, 1980].
Optimizing weight for a given space propulsion system depends upon its type and
specific operating parameters. Typically, for a system using a cold gas or pressure-fed
liquid chemical, thrust-chamberpressure is the key to establishing its weight. Increasing the chamber pressure in a system design and trade study produces several effects.
The engine will tend to be smaller and perform better because of increased area ratio
and, to a much lesser extent, improved chemical kinetics (combustion efficiency).
Therefore, the engine weight and propellant quantity will tend to decrease. Bllt the
propellant tank, components, and plumbing weights will increase because of the
higher level of operating pressure required to force-feed propellants to the system, its
components, and into the thrust chamber. The thrust chamber operates at some nominal pressure, which adds resistance by acting as a back pressure. Thus, for a given set
of design and operating conditions, we can find an optimum design point for chamber

j. .

!:.

716

Space Propulsion Systems

~

I !~
I

.I

I

pressure that results in a minimum weight for th
uI .
.
fed system, the 'Yeight of the feed system UPS~f ::;~~:~turbopump..
on the chamber pressure, so we can obtain the best·
d
not depend
chamber without considering the rest of the system.
an pressure ~or the thrust
we would trade the weight of a turbopump assembl s~, as menti0!led earlier,
:::-fed components to determine which approach i:b e : r

r::

~~~~~p~::

717

References

17.s

E

Another required definition is the structure fraction:
Est

= msll mol = msll [mpi

+msl + m p / u]

where ms == Tnj- mpll = mo - mpll- "'P_ and '!!P is the propellant mass.
Note that the mass ratio, R j , from Eq. (17-6) is related to the payload and structure
fractions as follows:
(17-27)

17.s Staging

r~:::f:~k= ~::;h~~~~~ ~!~;:::~ for=es~ith a hi~ LiV

~ket, propellant is stored in smaller, separate tanks ratherspa

~

multistage
m a single-stage rocket Since each tank is discarded w:!:' a larger smgle ~ as
expended to accelerate the empty tanks, so a higher total LiV is 0 e~pty, energy ~s not
a larger payload mass can be accelerated to the same total Liv.b~ned. Al~atively,
separate tanks are usually bundled with th .
. . ' or co~veruence, the
called a stage.
err own engtnes, WIth each discardable unit
The same rocket equation as single-stage rockets describes
.
formance, but must be determined on a sta e-b -s
.
multista~e ~ket perLiVit for each stage is calculated as before: g y tage basts. The velOCIty mcrement,

AV; ==g Isp

~:;)

(17-21)

where moi represents the total vehicle mass when ta . . .
.
vehicle mass when stage i burns out but is ot t ~ IgnItes, and ':{{ IS the total
fallWeblIlust ways realize
that the payload mass for any stage consiS: ol:.e
the payload. Then th t tal I . .
mass 0
su sequent stages plus
• di 'dual
, e 0 ve OClty Increment for the vehicle is the sum of those ti
stages:
or
the m VI
n
AV,otal

(17-26)

=M'I +A\-'2 +···+AVn = LAlo'i

(17-22)

i=1

where n is the total number of stages.
m ~ededfinthe. thtie paythload fraction. Aas the ratio of payload mass,;""" to initial mass
tr
0 IS or e overall v e h i c l e : - - P ' "
,
(17-23)

Thus we can detennine AV; for any stage knowing lsp, A,;, and Esj.
We say a multistage vehicle with identical specific impulse, payload fraction and
structure fraction for each stage has similar stages. For such a vehicle, we maximize
the payload fraction by having each stage provide the same velocity increment We
calculate the payload fraction for each stage by:

A; =e-(AVlOlIlllnI~) -E.

(17-28)

and the overall vehicle payload fraction by:

A= (Aj)n

(17-29)

For a multistage vehicle with dissimilar stages the overall vehicle payload fraction
depends on how we partition the LiV requirement among stages. We reduce payload
fractions when we partition the AV suboptimally. Techniques have been developed
which yield an analytical solution for the optimal AV distribution [Hill and Petersen,
1970], or we may determine the optimal distribution by trial and error. In the latter
approach, a AV distribution is postulated and the resulting payload fraction calculated
as previously outlined. We have to vary the AV distribution until the payload fraction
is maximized. Once we select the AV distribution, we size the vehicle by starting with
the uppermost or final stage (whose payload is the payload) and calculating the initial
mass of this assembly. This assembly then forms the payload for the previous stage
and the process repeats until all stages are sized.
Results reveal that to maximize the payload fraction for a given AV requirement:
1. Stages with higher lsp should be above stages with lower lsp.
2. More AV should be provided by the stages with the higher Isp.
3. Each succeeding stage should be smaller than its predecessor.
4. Similar stages should provide the same AV.

or for each individual stage:

References
A=mpllt I moj

(17-24)

;:~~~scriPt: indicates the stage number. Recall that the pa~load for each stage
the product of::e :

s~:~::~~e overall vehicle payload fraction is then
n

A=A. '~"'An =nAI
1=1

(17-25)

Altman, D.E. 1981. Presented at the AIAA Annual Meeting.
Clark, K.E. 1975. "Survey of Electric Propulsion Capability." Journal a/Spacecraft
and Rockets. 12 (11):641-654.
Fritz, D.E., and R.L. Sackheim. 1982. "Study of a Cost-Optimized Pressure-Fed
Liquid Rocket Launch Vehicle." Paper No. AIAA-82-1108 presented at the AIAA
18th Joint Propulsion Conference, Cleveland. Ohio.

r

718

Space Propulsion Symems

Furstenau, R.P., T.D. McCoy, and David M. Mann 1980 "US Air F
•.
orce Approach to
Plume Co tllmin· ...
Envi
n
a~on. In Proceedings 0/ the Seminar in Optics i Adv
ronments. SocIety for Photo-Optical Instrumentation
•
n
erse
. Engmeers.
~~;U~f.b ~cB~de. 197.6: Computer Program/or Calculation 0/ Complex
Sho ks.
I num OmpOSlttons, Rocket Performance Incident and Refl
d
NA~A'Le~s f/:Pman-Jouget De~onations. NASA SP-i73, Interim Revi:C:
esearch Center: National Aeronautics and Space Administra . .
Gtbri
~
u e, Douglas M and Robert S W0If 1990 •
Instability in Hybrid Rocket Motors ;, Pa .
100'Non-Acoustic Combustion
Conference. Anaheim, CA.
.
per presen
at the JANNAF Propulsion
Hill, Phili~ G., and Carl R. Peterson. 1970. Mechanics and The
•
rmodynamics of
Propulsion. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Co.

Hum~le, Ronald W., G.N. Henry, and WJ. Larson. 1995

s.'

Huzel, Dieter K., and David H Huang 1992 D·
Rocket Engines. Washington·DC:
eSlgn

0/ LIquid Rocket PropeUant

ySlS and Design. New York: McGraw-Hill.

00. .

.

. pacecra/t PropulsIOn Anal-

.

Jensen, G.E., et al 1990 Hyb ·d P ulsi
United Technol~gies chemi~ Sy::ms ~~AlMechnoSFlocgyCoProgram Final Report.
.
.
ntract NAS 8-37778.
Martin JW 1986 "U ·d Propell
Ma~.
InC.~;(I).
ant Management in Space Vehicles." Quest

(TRW,
Sackheim R.L and D H H k
. •
Comb' ti A
.. 00. 1996.
'Development of a Bimodal Secondary
us on ugmented Thruster (SCAT) .. Penn State 8th Annual
.
.
Space Propulsion, State College, Penn., <ktober 31.

SymPOSium on

Salmon, M. 1968. World Aerospace Systems.
StuhIin
Boor20;::;/964. Ion Propulsion/or Space Flight. New York: McGraw-Hill

S~ie~;~~~992. Rocket Propulsion Elements (6th edition). New York: John,
TlIDDat,
Press. Y.M. 1987• A~·
.,vanced Chemical Rocket Propulsion. London: Academic

Tsiolko~ky, "Konstantin E. 1903. "Exploration of the Universe
Machines. The Science Review #5 (St Petersburg, Russia).

with Reaction

Chapter 18
Launch Systems
Joseph P. Loftus Jr. and Charles Teixeira,

NASA lohnson Space Center
Updated by Douglas Kirkpatrick,

United States Air Force Academy
lS.l Basic Launch Vehicle Considerations
lS.2 Launch System Selection Process
lS.3 Determining the Spacecraft Design Envelope and
Environments

The launch process can severely constrain spacecraft design. Primary restrictions
are the launch vehicle's lift capability and the envirolllIWnt to which it subjects the
satellite during ascent A lalinch system consists of a basic launch vehicle incorporating one or more stages and an infrastructure for ground support It alters velocity to
place the spacecraft in orbit, creates a severe ascent environment, and protects the
spacecraft from its surroundings. Ultimately, it places the payload into the desired
orbit with a functional spacecraft attitude. In this chapter the term payload includes all
hardware above the launch-vehicle-to-spacecraft interface, excluding the payload's
protective fairing, Which is usually part of the launch system. Thus, the launch-velrlcle
payload consists of the entire spacecraft above the booster adapter interface. For the
Shuttle, it is customary to speak of the payload as the spacecraft to be deployed Dr the
sortie mission payload to be operated from the payload bay with the Shuttle providing
all of the support functions. Shuttle missions normally accommodate both types of
payloads on each flight.
The aerospace industry has typically managed launch vehicles in one organization
and spacecraft in another, reinforcing a tendency to budget and manage at the interface. This approach has been, and in many cases will continue to be, successful.
However, we must continue to ensure it leads to the most cost-effective technical and
management solutions. For example, traditional interfaces may not be appropriate as
new generations of maneuverable spacecraft with their own inertial references become
common. These spacecraft-borne inertial platforms could be used to guide and
navigate launch systems, replacing similar systems in the launch vehicle.
Over the last 30 years, launch vehicle performance has improved tenfold while
reliability has slowly increased from 0.85 to roughly 0.95. Planners often do not
appreciate that launch-system reliability and cost are keys to a successful mission.
Because the spacecraft usually costs more than the launch system, it can be very costeffective to spend a bit more for a launch system with more reliability.

119

Launch Systems

720

18.1

In this chapter we discuss some of the fundamental ph .cal

I~unch vehicles and upper stages, followed by a di . f;: consIderations of
tion process as ou~ed in Table 18-1, and finall~~~tion ~~spc~Csecraftystemdesisel~­
.

.

go

envelopes and enVlIOnments.
TABLE 18-1. Steps In Selecting a Launch System
Comments and Required Information

Step

References

See text

1. Collect requirements
and constraints, which
~nd on the mission
operations concept.
Consider the
deployment strategy.

Number of spaCecraft per launch
Spacecraft dry weight
Spacecraft dimensions
Mission orbit
Mission tlmeRne
Funding constraints

2. Identify and analyze
acceptable
configurations for the
launch system.

Include the following Information for each
potential configuration:
- Weight of spacecraft propellant
- Orbit-Insertion stage weight, If required
- Weight of booster adaptor
- Performance margin available
- Boosted weight capabifrty
-Reliability

Chap. 17
Chap. 17, Table 18·2
Sees. 11.6, 18.3
Sec. 182
Tables 18-2,18-4
Table 18-3

3. Select launch systems Criteria based on the following parameters:
for spacecraft design.
- Boosted weight capability
During conceptual
-Cost
design, Identify several
- Perfo~nce margin available
potential launch
-Reliability
systems to make the
- Schadule vs. vehIcle availability
launch more likely.
- Launch availability

Tables 18-2, 18-4
Chap. 20
Sec. 182
Table 18-3, 192
Mission planning est
Sec. 182, Eq. (18-5)

4. Determine spacecraft
design envelope and
environments dictated
by the launch system
selected.

Include the following information for each
lau~h system, and include the worst-case
enVlron,:"ents for combined launch systems:
- Fainng size and shape
- Maximum accelerations
- Vibration frequencies and magnitudes
- Acoustic frequencies and magnitudes
- Temperature extremes
- Air cleanliness
- Orbital insertion accuracy
- Interfaces to launch site and vehicle

Figure 18-1 shows the forces acting on a launch vehicle and the associated freebOdy diagram. Note that the weight, W, of the vehicle acts at its center-of-gravity, cg,
and the aerodynamic forces-lift, L, and drag, D, act at its center-of-pressure, cpo This
configuration, with the center-of-gravity ahead of the center-of-pressure, is stable
since the lift and drag forces cause restoring torques about the vehicle's center-ofgravity. Ideally, thrust, T, acts through the centerline of the vehicle but we can develop
a control torque by gimbaIling the engine nozzle. We measure the vehicle's flight path
angle, ,p, from the local horizon to its velocity vector and we measure its angle-ofattack, a, from its velocity vector to its centerline.

Chaps. 10, 11
Chaps. 10, 11
Chap. 7
Mission planning est
MIssion planning est

v

cg = center-of1lravlly
cp center-of·pressure
a= angle of attack
~ = fUght path angle

Free-body DIagram

=

w

w

Rg. 18-1. Forces Acting on a Launch Vehicle. By summing all the forces on a launch vehicle,
we can compute its acceleration and velocity, using Eqs. (18-1), (18-2), and an integrating process.

Ag.18-8
Table 18-8
Table 18-9, Ag. 18-10
Ag.18-12
Sec. 18.3
Sec. 18.3,Table 18-7
Table 18-10
Ag.18-8

Using the free-body diagram in Fig. 18-1, we can develop expressions for the
acceleration along the axial, aX' and lateral, al.' body reference axes.
(18-1)
ax g [TIW - sin(,p + a) - DIW cos(a) + LIW sinean

=

a = g [-cos(,p+ a) + DlWsin(a) + LIW cos(a)}
z

(18-2)

We use Eqs. (18-1) and (18-2) to develop the vehicle's estimated acceleration shown
in Table 18-8. We can calculate thrust and drag using Eqs. (17-1) and (6-21), respectively, and integrating Eqs. (18-1) and (18-2) in an inertial reference frame to yield the
estimated velocity of the launch vehicle.
We can easily estimate the velocity that a launch vehicle should provide by

5. Iterate to meet
Document and maintain the criteria, decision
conStraints on
process and data to support program
performance, cost, risk changes.
and schedule.

18.1 Basic Launch Vehicle Considerations
Space launch systems are unique forms of trans
.
.
systems that accelerate continuously throughout th po~on smce they are the only
quentJy velocity is the fundam tal
elr p"uormance envelope. Conse-

Orb:m~~~ ~~~r ::aunc~ systems: A

launc:h ;ystem's ability to achie::
effiCIency, with vehicle weight and drag acting against it

721

Basic Launch Vehicle Considerations

18.1

y

m Its propulsIon

AVdesign

=AVbumout + AVgravity + AVdrag

(18-3)

is the velocity required for the desired orbiL We add the velocity
where AV
burnout
and AVdrag, to the burnout velocity to obtain the required design
losses, AVgravity
velocity. We also have to account for velocity losses from thrust vector control for
trajectory shaping and other performance variables, such as solid rocket motor bulk

722

Launch Systems

!
I

J

18.1

temperature, which causes thrust-level variations. Fig. 18-2 shows values for gravity
and drag losses for a typical two-stage vehicle. Note that these losses are sensitive to
the initial tm:ust-to-weight ratio, T~. A low thrust-to-weight ratio causes gravity
los~ to be high because the vehicle spends more time in ascent, While high thrust-toweIght causes drag losses to be high because of the higher velocities achieved in the
a~osphere. 'J!le ~t-to-we~ght ratio is a key launch vehicle parameter because it
dictates the VIbration, acoUStic, and dynamic load environment for the spacecraft.
These environments are discussed in Sec. 18.3.

A11Ian IV .

~

~

250

~

Launch System Selection Process

723

thing above the launch vehicle interface, including mass of the spacecraft bus,
yload. and any upper stages. We use mass fractions to describe the portion ~f ~e
fught vehicle devoted to certain sections. For example, ~e propellant mass fractton IS
the mass of propellant divided by the total flight v~hicle .mass; the structure ~s
fraction or deadweightfraction is the structural mass, lDcluding ~e!Dass of the famng,
divided by total flight vehicle mass; and the payload mass fractton IS the payload mass
divided by total flight vehicle mass. Typical values !or propellant, structure, and
payload mass fractions are 0.85,0.14, and O.oI, respectively.

18.2 Launch System Selection Process

AStwtIle

1,000

18.2

The first step in the launch system selection process is. to establish the mi~ion
needs and objectives, since they dictate the perfonnance, trajectory, and the family?f
vehicles which can operate from suitable sites. The ~on need should.be sta~ m
terms of the specific return desired, e.g.. Earth observation data over ~fic ~ons
of the Earth, weather information, ~. The missi~ ne:<l ~y very specific as m the
case of a military objective, or as broad as a PresIdential Directive to land man on the
Moon within a decade. A clear understanding of the real mission need is ex~ely
important since it can dictate the launch strategy. For example, large conste~ati~ns of
spacecraft may require periodic replenishment!aunches after the cons~ll~on IS full.
At the same time, a tactical satellite may reqUIre launch on demand WIthin weeks or
days. These drastically different requirements denJand different performance from the
launch system and its supporting infrastructure.
.
Another critical issue is whether the spacecraft will use a dedicated or shared
launch system. The dedicated system may cost more, but it lessens the chances ~ a
problem with another spacecraft will adversely affect the launch. Payload secunty
may also demand a dedicated launch. On .~e other hand, shared launches are us~y
less expensive per spacecraft. Before decIding on a shared launch, we must. consIder
the interaction between payloads in the shroud. If we mount them senally, for
example, we must analyze the probability that the upper payload will not deploy
and thus interfere with the lower payload's deployment Examples o~ larger ve~cles
that can launch multiple payloads are the Space Shu~e, several Ari~e 4. vanB;Dts, .
Ariane 5 and Titan IV. We consider launching multiple spacecraft if their desired
orbital aititudes and inclinations are compatible. This works especially well for the
Space Shuttle, when primary mission payloads don't fill the paylo~ ~ay, ~r w~en the
spacecraft are deployable and sortie operations has room. on the ~o~ ~elines:
Once we establish the mission need, then we determme specific mJSSlon reqwrements. For low-Earth orbit missions, these usually consist of orbit altitude, inclination,
and right ascension of the ascending node. In addition, estima~ payload weight. and
dimensions become requirements to the launch system. The mJSSlon concept specifies
such parameters as number of spacecraft, anticipated lifeti:t;ne and replacement strategy, and method of data retrieval and management A required la~ch date also ~y
become a selection parameter as it affects schedules, and the vehicle and launch SIte
availabilities.
We allocate the mission requirements as functional requirements between the
launch vehicle and payload. The basic question is, "What specific ~ctions or operations must the payload accomplish, and which must the launch vehicle perform?" The
two functions usually affected are propulsion, and guidance, navigation, and conb'ol.
For example, can the launch vehicle achie~e the fin~ orbit, ~ m~ the spacec:mft
provide orbital maneuvering capability to raise the orbIt to a higher altitude or change

tx:

~

~

2

Drag

t---.
3
TlWo

Gravity
4

Flg.18-2. Launch System Performance Losses. At the low end of TIVl{, gravity losses are
higher because the launch vehicle spends more time ascendlng: At the high end of
. T/Vl{,. drag losses are higher because the launch vehicle reaches a higher velocity in
the atmosphere.

.If there were no atm~he,re and no topqgraphica1 variations, an optimum launch
~J~?IY would be ~ery similar to a Hohmann transfer and gravity losses would be

minimized by thrusting normal to the radius vector. To accurately estimate gravity
losses we need to know a precise ascent profile and time of flight But for medium-tolarge launch vehicles on nominal trajectories the velocity losses due to gravity fall
between 750 and 1,500 mls.
. Aerodyn~c drag forces acting on a launch vehicle are a function of the shape and
SIZe of the vehicle, speed, and angle-of-attack, a. We can manipuiateEq. (6-21) to get

DIW =Cd (AIW) q

(18-4)

whe,re Cd is the dimensionless coefficient of drag (about 2.2), A is the vehicle's crosssectional area perpendicular to its velocity vector, and the dynamic pressure, q, is
one-half the product of the atmospheric density (at the vehicle's clUTent altitude) and
the velocity squared. For the current inventory of large, expendable launch vehicles
velocity losses due to drag are less than 3% of the total change in velocity ~
about 20 to 40 mls. The percentage decreases as the size of the vehicle decreases.
Once ,,:e know the required design velocity, .1Vdesign, from mission requirements,
we c~ estimate the mass of propellant required for the launch vehicle using Eq. (17-7)
for slDgie stage ~kets and Sec. 17.5 for launch systems with multiple stages.
Several definitions are useful at this point The flight vehicle mass is the sum of the
propellant mass, structure mass, including mass of the fairing, and the mass of every-

I
I'.

724

Launch Systems

18,,2

Launch System Selection Process

18.2

725

I

:(

inclination? The launch vehicle may require an upper stage to achieve the final orbit,
adding to the launch cost. The alternative is to provide sufficient propulsive capability
on the spacecraft to perform the final propulsive maneuvers. We must carefully weigh
the impact to the spacecraft in additional propellant and tankage. in terms of cOst and
complexity to the spacecraft design and trade against the potentially higher launch cost
associated with an upper stage.
AsimiIar trade is made in navigation. guidance, and control (Chap. 11.7). Spacecraft computer capabilities have grown by orders of magnitude over the past twenty
years. Consequently, the spacecraft navigation. guidance and control subsystem can
technically provide this function to the launch system during ascent. However, this
approach results in a highly coupled payload and launch system which presents some
negative attributes, including a more complex integration of the two, and makes it
more difficult to manage at the spacecraft-to-Iaunch-vehicle interface. The current
trend is to separate the spacecraft and launch system functions at the interface, both
functionally and physically, to minimize interface requirements and complexity.
We must assess each function required to achieve the mission objective through
this process. and allocate functions based on cost. reliability, and risk. This is a classic
systems engineering problem, which we must continuously evaluate as part of the
vehicle selection process and as the spacecraft design matures.
Having established mission requirements, constraints, and the required information
in Step 1 of Table 18-1. we must decide which launch-system configurations can
deliver the spacecraft to its mission orbit. The launch systems selected during conceptual design should satisfy the mission's perfonnance requirements and minimize
program risk. We want to choose the launch systems early, so contractors for the
spacecraft and launch system can negotiate requirements early. as well. Doing so
decreases changes in design, cost, and schedule downstream. Recent experiences
show that we should design spacecraft to be compatible with several launch systems
to enhance launch probability. as well as to provide some leverage in negotiating
launch cost. FIxing problems that may cause launches to fail takes months or years. If
we change the launcher we may have to redesign the spacecraft and its interfaces with
the launch vehicle. A redesign costs a lot of time and money. To solve this problem.
we select an alternate launch vehicle, as a backup. early in the process, and design the
spacecraft to be compatible with both.
Selecting a launch system depends on at least these criteria: the launch vehicle's
performance capability to boost the necessary weight to the mission orbit, the
required launch date versus vehicle availability, spacecraft-to-launch-vehicle compatibility, and of course, cost of the launch service. The launch system's perfonnance
capability must include factors such as perfonnance margin, and a clear definition of
weight and performance parameters as given in Table 18-2. Note that the payload
performance quoted by launch vehicle manufacturers must be greater than the pr0jected boosted weight. This difference (launch system perfonnance capability minus
spacecraft boosted weight) is referred to as performance margin and is an important
selection criterion. Note that the perfonnance margin is in addition to the allowances
made for spacecraft weight growth (see Table 10-9).
Perfonnance margin is an important parameter throughout a program. but it is
particularly important early in a program. Ideally a spacecraft launches with a small
positive performance margin, meaning that the spacecraft weighs (when it is completed and delivered) just what the launch system can place into orbit. For spacecraft
with propulsion systems, we use propellant loading to trim the fmal weight.

TA

BLE 18-2. Weight Parameter DeflnlUons. These are the key elements of a weight budget
Performance charts for launch vehicles usually list only payload performance
capabiUty.
WeIght Parameters

1. Spacecraft Dry Weight

plus propellant

Comments
Weight of all spacecraft subsystems and sensors,
including weight growth allowance of 15-25"k at concept
definition
Weight of propellant required by the spacecraft to
parform Its mission when Injected Into Its mission orbit

Yields
Mlsslon-capable spacecraft weight (wet weight)
2. Loaded Spacecraft Weight
plus Upper Stage Vehicle Weight Weight of any apogee or perigee kick motors and stages
added to the launch system
Yields
Total weIght achieving orbit
3. Injected Weight
May also include airborne support equIpment on the
plus Booster Adapter Weight
Space Shuttle
Yields
Total weight that must be lifted by the launch vehicle
4. Boosted Weight
The amount of performance retained In reserve (for the
plus Performance Margin
booster) to allow for all other uncertainties.
Yields
this Is the payload weight contractors say their launch
5. Payload Performance Capability
systems can 11ft

Occasionally this happens. but more often the spacecraft' s wei~t ~ws.~yo~d
~ected weight growth allocations. Make s~ th~ spacecraft WeIght I~ WI n e
I::ncher capability and that the weight growth IS WIthin the allocated wel~t growth
margin (see Table 10-10). The longer the wait to reduce weight, the more It costs. Do
it early!
abili di
.
ty, sc~S1ons
If the launch system does not have sufficient perfonnan~e cap
with the launch vehicle manufacturer can frequently result m some au~entation to
the performance, selection of a higher ~o~ce launch system. or, if necessary.
reevaluation of the spacecraft design and Its requrrements. These trades are ~ of the
selection process whereby we continuously reevaluate cost,. schedule. and nsk.
We further evaluate the candidate launch systems which pass the p:rformance
"gate" based on their available payload fairings. The fairings must be.physlcally larg:
enough to house and protect the spacecraft during ascent. and the mterf~ to th
spacecraft. both structural attachment and other services such as cooling (see
Sec. 18.3), must be acceptable to the spacecraft.
We must also consider the launch schedule and whether· th~ preferred I~unch
system will be available. Given the required launch date and ~ow,. we discUSS
availability with contractors of launch services. Schedule co~derati0n:'. ~hould
include the launch site's availability as well as the use of any umque facilities f:
ground processing. For example, on the requested launch d~te, the launch pad may.
available but activities nearby may keep us from launchin~ for.~~ or sec::
reasons. Thus, we have to examine the entire infiastructure. mclu~g I~ms su
ground-~upport equipment and networks for tracking ~d CODUDumcatIonS. Several
off-site facilities are available for processing.-<;ommerclally and through agreements

726

i!

I,'f
I'
;

Launch Systems

18.2

with government agencies. Fmally, if we intend to change the launch site, we DlUst
consider the effect on scheduling and cost
Launch aVailability brings other dimensions to launch-system selection. The availability of a launch system depends on its reliability, production capacity, the ability of
the launch operations system to support the desired launch rate, existing launch COIDmitments, and its demonstrated stind-down time following a failure. The relationship

.i

A

=1- [L(1 - R)1dI(1 -1/S)]

Launch System Selection Process

18.2
TABLE 18-3.

0.9 r-----r--~--~---r-_ __,;__-_,;_-_,
0.8
0.7 t---+----+_ _-+--=..,=;......--I'"---=........_ - I

,-Launch
System

0.97

0.975

0.98

0.985

Vehicle ReIIabDJty

I•

FIlght Ralh 4

0.99

0.995

X FIlght Rate = 8

Rg.18-3. Vehicle AvalIabDIty. Even with a high surge capablflty (1.4), a launch system may
have low availability (0.43) for a modest launch rate (4 per year) and a high reUabiDty
(0.96). For a high launch rate (8 per year), the same system may not be available

when needed.

Using the above criteria, we can narrow the field of candidates to a few launch
systems by evaluating them consistently and systematically. A risk analysis must also
accompany these assessments by considering:
• Are the advertised cost and schedules reasonable?
• How do these numbers compare with past experience?

• Is the offeror likely to stay in business? Or in some cases, is the country
providing the launch service stable?
• Are there any circumstances which are unique or new that could result in
additional risk?

No. of
Total
Successful
No. of
Launclles Launches
94

R
0.989

LastFaliure Average Launclles
Downtime DownUme Since Last
(months)
(months)
failure
32

32

69

Shuttle

93

ntan " (since 1970)
ntan IV

18

18

1.000

23

25

0.920

6

6

0

Atlas Centaur
(since 1970)

142

155

0.916

8

10

45

Delta (since 1970)

170

179

0.950

4

4

1

Arlane4

93

99

0.939

5

9

39

Arlane 5

2

3

0.670

17

17

2

216

232

0.931

4

3

41

Long March (CZ)

49

54

0.907

1

12

14

Zenlt2

23

27

0.852

14

14

2

PegesusIXL

20

22

0.909

9

9

13

1,225

1,293

0.947

1

unknown

24

5

6

11

proton (since 1970)

SoyuzIMolnlya
(since 1970)

209

211

0.991

M-V

2

2

1.000

H·2

6

6

1.000

Tsyklon

0.985

liability experience of Launch Systems. This table shows the rellablfrty of
:matiOnailaunch systems along with their stand-down times following a faDure
of Decamber 1998. R is the reliability. lsakowltz [1995] provides additional
information.

~

(18-5)

allows us to discuss this concept. Here the expected launch availability, A, measured
in percent of the time the launch system is available, depends on the vehicle's reliability, R. the nominal or planned launch rate, L, in units of flights per year, the
demonstrated (or estimated) stand-down time following a failure, T , in units of years,
d
and the 'surge-rate capacity, S, where S =15 means the system can achieve a flight
rate 50% higher than the planned rate L. Launch systems in the United States can
typically surge to between 1.15 and 1.5 times the nominal launch rate. Figure 18-3
illustrates results from Eq. (18-5). Negative results mean that the system probably
would not be available when needed. We must use Eq. (18-5) with caution since a
singularity occurs for surge values approaching one, i.e., the system has no surge
capacity. Commitment to two systems with poor availability means that some of the
spacecraft so committed will not fly or may be delayed for several years. Table 18-3
provides estimated reliability and stand-down times for typical launch systems.

727

. . IS
. predicated on careThese are difficult questions to address, but a successful lDlSSlOn
ful consideration of these factors.
.
bl de I Y
T .d ntify the best combinations, we should examme several ~ccepta e p 0 ole .
.
e ts There are three primary options for the ascent
direct injection by
usin various launch and stage vehicle combinations, or 1D]~bOn USl~g an ~tegral
system. Small payloads can usually use launch
that msert
r::low-Earth orbit. For geostationary orbits,
typlC'::y
au:::
s
the
us to Inse
.
ecraft. Because the system must operate for the entire
li uid bipropellant or an ion engine.
propellant system 1D the ~.
mission with many restarts, It typIcally uses a q
boo ted eight,
Table 18-4 lists available launch systems, their ability to la,:ch th~
~ ~dard
compatible upper stages, available launch sites, and envelope mensl0ns or
uals
•
inti
rmation
on
these
systems,
see
e
user
man
th
18-4 and 18-5 show,
payload fairings. For more preclSe o .
gh.
listed just before the references at the end of this chap~r. Fi~
performanCe curves for selected launch vehicles at vanous albtu~. Althouof ~~:
seem endless, usually only a few candidate syste~ mee~ requm:me~~ pay and
·ght· ·ected· to the desired orbit, weight margm, vehicle availability, cost,
weI
In]
m
hi I
d th . "'-ormance
Iiabil·ty
In additi·on Table 18-5 lists available stage ve c es an
err Y"'" •
•
re
1
.
,
d
Ii
.
d
. es, respecbvely.
Tables 17-6 and 17-7 list typical solid rocket motors an qw engm

~e: =~:tha:~~:gt~~s~~:cO~bi~:
~ion

~ ~~ch sy~tem, ~jection

vehi~les

directl;

~owever, w~
neet~
la~c~:~~~::n~==~~=t:~:;:e~ a~;::::wi':~ sin~e

~

"I

Ij
I,

728

Launch Systems

18.2

, I

729

Launch System Selection Process

18.2

I

I

d
1

TABLE 18-4. Launch Systems Characteristics. The table shows characteristics for existing systerns to 28.5 deg inclination, unless specified otherwise. Low-Earth orbit (LEO) fs given
here as approximately 185 km circular. GTO fs geosynchronous transfer orbit, and GEO
fs geosynchronous orbit Polar fs 90 deg inclination and 185 km circular. See lsakowilz
(1995) fordetalfs. Launch site letters are keyed to Table 18-6.

Launch
System
ATLAS I
ATLAS II
ATlAS lIAS
DELTA II
6920125
7920125

Payload
Accommodations

Upper

:=,
Centaur·1
Centaur-2
Centaur-2A

LEO
(kg)

-

6,580
6,640

GTO
(kg)
2,255
2,610
3,606

PAM-O
PAM-O

3,990
5,089

--

SHUITLE
IUS
TOS
PAM-O
PAM-D2

375
460
24,400

-

-

1,450
1,640

STAR 37

1,400

TITAN II

NUS

-

NUS
Centaur
IUS
NUS'

-

8,620
6,350'

21,645

-

H-l0

4,900

2,050

H-l0
H-l0
H-l0
H-l0
L9

6,100
7,400
6,900
8,300
9,600
18,000

2,640
3,380
3,320
4,060
4,520
6,800

-Numerous

10,500
1,800

4,000
1,215

-

790
7,200
13,600
4,000
8,800

200
2,500
4,500
1,100
3,370

20,900

5,500

20,100
22,000
13,740

4,615
5,100
5,180-

TITAN IV

42P

421.2

44P
44Lf>3
44L
ARIANE-5
H-2 (Japan)

MY
LONG MARCH
(Chlna

b
CZ3A
CZl

CZ3B

CZ4

CZ2E

PROTON

~Russia)

ROTONK
PROTONM
ZENIT2

tHO

Star63F
01
Ole
OM
BREEZEM

-

-

730
910

-5,900 2,360
5,900
1,300
1,800
450
-

TAURUSS

ARIANE40

-

570
1,050

Polar
(kg)

-

5,510
7,300

Launch
Site
B
B
B

Dia

(m)
3.3
4.2
4.2

--

~ ~ izen

10,000

- '" '"

-

1 Wi1h solid rocket motor upgrade
2 Wi1h two liquid rocket boosters
3 Wi1h two liquid and two solid rocket boosters
4 Cerrfer alrcraft can stege from various locations
5 Under development
64.5 m diameter and 18.0 m length allowing
lor dynamic cIaarance
7 Wi1h perigee and apogee kick motors

2,950
3,690

r--...

~

-

345

-

2.9
2.9

6.5
8.5

1aunch4

AircIaft

1.3
1.3

4.4
4.4

B

4.5

18.38

~
r-..::--..

........

"

1.4

2.8

1,905

A

-2.8

3.7.5.2,
6.7

14,110

4.56

18,6001

A,B
A,B
A,B
A,B

9.7
12.8
15.8
18.9

3,900

0

3.7

4,800
5,900
5,500
6,600
7,700
12,000

3.9S
4.9L
6.5 XL

0

4.56

12.0

~

6,600
1,300

P
0

3.7,4.6
2.2

3.5-5.0
3.5

1007
1,2307
2,250
550
1,5007

--11,380

4,540
2,380

-

-

2,200
2,100
2,500
1,535

-

=
=
=
=

K
L

L

M
L

H
H
H
H
H

1.SS
3.0
3.8
3.0
3.8

1.0
4.0
6.0
3.9
6.0

4.1
4.0

15.6
7.5

3.4

5.9-8.4

--

NUS No Upper S1age
IUS InerUaJ Upper Stage
TOS Transfer OrbIt S1age
PAM Payload AssIst Module

1,000

i!OO

"'''~

~

............

-----~ ~
1,000

A,B

ArIane 44L

~~ ~ I'-.....

4.67

1,060

XL

1'--.""""

100

'\

L.M-21

...........

10.4
12.0
12.0

A,B
A,B

- -

I:j

~

PEGASUS
PEGASUS XL

(France)

GEO
(kg)

:--- r--.
~ ~ llm,1\ /NUl . . . r-.

ArIane 10

"

~

'-...
~

is! po

","II
1 ,000

1,000

200

'7e ~D

Altitude (Ian)

FIg. 18-4. Typical Launch-System Performance for Launches Due East from U.s. Launch
Sites. Curves show delivery mass Into circular orbit at the altitude Indicated. The curves
Indicate development systems. Rgures courtesy Capt Marly France, U.S. AIr Force
Academy.

10,000

~

onlt-

-.......!II' n IVINJS

-... s:

i

--.......Arlane44L

'\ ~

l-g

.2

-

----

...........

....

~40 ~ /20

~ ~imll
1,000

-

-

r----.
100

200

--

!2D

--- -

DellaD

leu< ilUS XL

1,000

Polar Circular Orbit Altitude (kIn)_
Rg.18-5. Typical Launch-System Performance for Polar Launches from U.S. laUnch
Sites. For polar orbits there is no velocity assistance from the revolution of the Earth,
so the J8unch vehicle has to furnish the additional -450 mis, thus reducing deDvery

mass.

rI

730

TABLE 18-5.

I: ,

II

Launch Systems

Orb.'~1 TranSf~r VehIcles. A number of upper stages are avaUable to prOVIde
additional velOCity beyond low-Earth orbit reqUirements. Both solid and liqUid
systems are shown and compatible launch vehicles identified. .

Charac:terIstIc

PAM-D PAM-Oil

Stage:
Manufacturer

i

18.2

length (m)
Dfameter (m)

TOS

IUS

Lockheed
Boeing
MartIn

Manufacturer
: 1

Nwnber
Fual
Composition

H-10

D-M

l.g

RSC
Enargla

ArIane-

Boeing

MartIn

2.04

2.00

3.30

5.20

9.0

9.9

6.8

125

4.5

1.62

3.44

2.90

4.3

2.6

4.1

5.4

Thfokol

Thlokol

CSO

CSO

Whl!ney

SNECMA

lsayav

DASA

(Siar
48)

ISTP

SRM-l

SRM·l, SRM·2

Rll0A·3-3A

HM7B

110M 58

Aestus

Engine:
Type

Centaur
Lockheed

Arlanaspace

Boeing

space

Prall·

1

1

1

1,1

2

1

1

SoUd

1

SoUd

Solid

SoUd

l~~

l~LH2

~O'"

TP·H·

-

lOX
RP1

HTPB

HTPB

5.5:1

4.77

2.6

2.05

29.000

3340

MMH

Total Thrust (N)

66,440

78,300

147,000

Specific Impulse (s)

62.700

84.000

292.6

281.7

294

292.9

300.9

442

4442

361

54.8

324

121

150

153.0·

104.0

488

725

680

1100

Bum TIme (s)
SIage:
Pad Mass (kg)

200,000 200,000 81,200

2.180

3,490

10,800

18.800

Impulsa PropeL
Mass (kg)

12.100

18,400

10,900

2,000

3,240

9,710

9.710

2.750

16,700

10.800

15,050

9.700

Burnout Mass (kg)

189

250

1,090

1,255

1.150

2,100

AIrborne Support
Equip. Mass (kg)

1.300

2,140

1,200

1.140

1,600

1.450

4.310

-

-

-

lDustrallon:

~;

~.

14,865

3.350

~

~

~
1986

Schedule:
Start Date

1975

1980

1983

1978

1982

Operational Date

1982

1985

1986

1982

1990

eo
New

1988

New

1996

Type of
Development

Com·

Com·

merclal

mercIaI

Com·
merclal

U.S. GoY!

U.S. Gov't

ESA

IlS

ESA

Sponsor

Boeing

Boeing

OSC

USAF

USAF

ESA

IlS

ESA

~~~ ~m Division. United Technologies; ESA-European Space Agency; IlS-Internalionailaunch

As cas,. SC-Orbital Sciences Corporallon; RSC--Rocket Space Corporation; DASA-Dalmler Chrysler
rospace, SNECMA-Socfl!t4 Nationale dElUdes al de Constructions de Moteurs dAvion

The current version of the Delta launch system, Delta n, has two fonns: the 6925
and 7925 .. The 692? extended the earlier 3920's tanks to store more propellant and
added Thiokolsohd-rocket boosters for better performance. The 7925 uses an
upgraded Rocketdyne RS-27A main engine and Hercules GEM solid rocket boosters.
~ 6920 and 7920 are two-stage versions of the 'three-stage 6925 and 7925 respecti~ely. Both co~ vehicles use liquid oxygen and RP-l propellant in the first s~ge and
ru~gen tetrOXIde ~N204) and Aerozine 50 (A50) in the second stage. They use inertial
guIdance and provIde control moments from gimballed engines. Of the nine boosters,

18.2

Launch System Selection Process

731

six ignite at lift-off and stage at 57 sec. The other three ignite at altitude during the first
stage bum. The first and second stages are staged at 265 and 440 sec respectively. The
third stage uses a spin-stabilized Star 48 Brocket Iilotor in the PAM-D upper stage.
Atlas/Centaur launch vehicles include the Atlas I, Atlas n, Atlas llA,and AtlaS
nAS. The Atlas vehicle's core system uses liquid oxygen and hydrocarbons (RP-l) in
a stage-and-a-half form. with three engines ignited at lift-off. Two of these booster
engines jettison at 172 sec. and the third sustainer engine bums for another 111 sec.
The Atlas is inertially guided and controlled in pitch and yaw by gimballed engines.
Vernier engines on Atlas I control roll in the first stage. For Atlas n. IIA. and HAS, a'
hycIrazine roll control system attached to the interstage adapter controls the roll angle.
The Centaur uses liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen for propulsion. It has two
RL-IOA engines, which can start several times and bum 400 to 600 sec. Gimballed
engines control the Centaur during bum, and 12 reaction-control engines control it
when it coasts. On the nAS version, four solid rocket motors improve the lifting
capacity. Two motors ignite with the three main engines for lift off. When the first two
motors bum out they drop off, then the other two bum until depleted and drop off.
The Titan II is a refurbished ballistic missile configured as a launch vehicle. It was
essentially the core vehicle for the retired Titan III series.. For fuel, the Titan n uses
storable propellants: a nitrogen tetroxide oxidizer and Aerozine 50 (a 50150 mixture of
hycIrazine and UDMH). Adding two solid rocket boosters and a third stage for the
Titan mvehicle increased lift capability significantly. Fifty-five Titan n missiles were
available to modify, eleven of which completed modification and launched successfully, as of late 1998. The Titan IV vehicle adds solid rockets to the Titan core vehicle.
The solid rockets are the "zero" stage ignited for lift-off, whereas the core vehicle's
engines ignite when the solid.:rocket motor's thrust tails off before separating. The
Titan N zero stage burns 138 sec, the first stage 164 sec, and the second stage 223 sec.
A strap-down inertial system provides guidance using liquid injection (UDMH) to
control the thrust vector in the zero stage and gimballed engines for the first and second stages. Titan N is compatible with two upperstages, IUS and Centaur.
The Space Shuttle delivers, services, and recovers payloads. The Shuttle uses two
solid-rocket boosters and three liquid-oxygen and liquid-hydrogen engines for propulsion. The solid-rocket boosters bum out at approximately 123 sec. At first, the main
engines bum in paraIlel with the solids, then continue to bum for 522 sec. For each
flight. the Shuttle can carry up to three PAM-D payloads, one IUS, or one TOS.
The Pegasus air-launched booster and its -XL variant use wings to provide lift and
three stages powered by solid-rocket motors. A strapped-down inertial system guides
the booster. Aerodynamic fins control the fIrst stage, and vectorable nozzles control
the second and third stages. A cold-gas system for reaction control adjusts attitude
while the spacecraft coasts and when the payload deploys and separates. Employing a
Lockheed L-I0ll as a launch platform reduces the propellant needed to achieve orbit
and provides variable launch azimuths and locations for different orbital inclinations.
Space Data Corporation, a subsidiary of the Orbital Sciences Corporation, developed a standard, small launch vehicle called Taurus. The fIrst stage is essentially an
MX missile first stage, and the upper stages are similar to those flown on Pegasus,
without the atlached wing. Two successful launches in 1998 placed seven satellites
into low-Eartlforbit. .
.
Lockheed-Khrunichev-Energia International offers Proton for commercial
launcheS. The original Russian D-le version has four stages and delivers payloads to
geostationary orbits. The fIrst three stages use stomble propellants (UDMH and N20 4),

732

Launch Systems

18.2

but the upper stage bums liquid oxygen and kerosene and has a multiple start capability. It has supported planetary and lunar launches and placed communication satellites
in space. The 3-stage D-l launches the MIR and other large payloads into low-Earth
orbits. The new commercial K and M versions use the same first three stages, but add
the DM and Breeze M upperstages, respectively.
China's Great Wall Industries builds, offers commercially, and operates the Long
March vehicles. The Long March CZ3 is a three-stage vehicle, using storable propellants in the first two stages and cryogenic liquid-oxygen and liquid-hydrogen in the
third stage. A new heavy-lift variant, the CZ3B, uses four liquid strap-ons and can
carry 13,600 kg into low-Earth orbit.
The current versions of the Ariane launch system are the Ariane 4 and 5 series.
Arianespace operates these vehicles commercially. Ariane 4 is a three-stage vehicle
capable of using from zero to four strap-on solid or liquid rocket boosters. The liquid
strap-ons and stages one and two use·storable nitrogen tetroxide and UH-25 (a mixture
of 75% unsymmetrical dimethyIhydrazine and .25% hydrazine hydrate). The third
stage burns liquid hydrogen and oxygen. Ariane 5 is a new, heavy-lift vehicle,
designed for reliability and cost effectiveness. It has a core stage that uses liquid
hydrogen and oxygen, an upper stage that burns nitrogen tetroxide and monomethyl
hydrazine, and two solid-rocket-motor strap-ons that are recoverable. Eventually,
Arianespace will rate this vehicle for crewed launches. It has had ·two successful
launches after an initial launch failure. Ariane launch vehicles are efficient boosters
for low-inclination or geotransfer missions because of their Kourou launch site: just
5 deg north latitude. As a result of the location and launch successes, they have
captured more than half of the launch traffic for commercial communication satellites.
Japan's space agencies operate two launch systems and are designing a third. The
H-2 is a new heavy-lift vehicle that can place 10,500 kg into low-Earth orbit. This twostage vehicle burns liquid hydrogen and oxygen in both stages and has two soIidrocket-motor strap-ons. Launching from Tanegashima Space Center, it has six
successes in six attempts. The M-5 is a new three-stage vehicle, capable of launching
1,800 kg into low-Earth orbit. All stages use solid rocket motors, burning hydroxy-terminated polybutadiene (lITPB). This vehicle operates from the Kagoshima Space
Center and has two successes in two attempts. A new design, 1-1, uses the H-2 solid
rocket booster as stage one and the two upper stages from the M-3Sn as its uwer
stages. Because of these common parts, its design went quickly.
Table 18-6 lists the available launch sites for eac~ launch system. Once we have
identified the mission orbit and launch system, the appropriate launch site(s) become
apparent. The key U.S. launch sites are the Eastem Range at Cape Canaveral Air Force
Station, Florida, which serves the Kennedy Space Center next to it, and the Western
Range at Vandenberg Air Force Base, Ca1ifornia. The Wallops Island facility in
Virginia can launch a number of smaller commercial launch vehicles and sounding
rockets.
Figure 18-6 shows the location of the world's launch sites, and Table 18-6 identifies
their coordinates. We can get the best performance from a launch vehicle into a direct
orbit by locating the launch site a~ the equator to take advantage of the easterly velocity
from Earth's rotation. Theoretically, we can attain any orbit inclination from the equator, but we may select other sites for convenient access, security, or political reasons.
Launch sites at higher latitudes cannot directly access orbit inclinations much below
their latitude, and trajectory profiles that go to higher inclinations sacrifice velocity
and payload mass. An inclination change of one degree requires about 208 mls of

Launch System Selection Process

18.2

733

. . low Earth orbit. As Eq. (6-38) shows, this number decreases as the .altitude
velOCIty
m mcreases.
.We can calculate the propellant mass required to achieve the
f the change
~lane change using Eq. (17-7).

j

-70

····t····t···+··+··+

~
~o

~

~

00

00

~

~

~

East

~ ~ ~
longitude

~

~

~

00

00

~

~

west

:::~~~h~~~:rang: safety considerations determine the acceptable launch

17 ites have done or can do orbital launches. The location of

Fig. 18-6.

azimuths.
TABLE 18-6. Worldwide Launch Sites. The location of launch sHes is useful when deciding on
launch azimuth

Map

Country

latitude Longitude
(deg min) (deg min)

Western Range

Vandenberg AFB, CA UnHed States

3436N 12036 W

Eastern Range

Ca~ Canaveral

UnHed States

2830 N

8033W

Launch Site

Designation

AF ,Cape Kennedy
Space Center
Wallops Island

Wallops, VA

UnHed States

3751 N

7528 W

Kourou Launch Ctr

Kourou

CNESlArianespace

5.32 N

5246 W

San Marco Launch Platform San Marco

Italy

256 S

40 12 E

Plesetsk

Plesetsk

Russia

6248N

40 24 E

Kapustln Yar

Kapustin Yar

Russia

48 24 N

45 48 E

Tyuratam (Balkonur)

Tyuratam

Russia

45 54 N

63 18 E

Thumba Equatorial Station

Thumba

UNllndla

835N

76 52 E

Srlharlkota

Srlharikota

India

1347 N

80 15 E

Jiuguan SateUHe Launch Ctr Jluguan

China

4042N

100 00 E

Xlchang SatellHe Launch Ctr Xlchang (Sichuan)

China

28 12 N

102 00 E

Talyuan SatenHe Launch Ctr TaJyuan

China

3748 N

112 30 E

Kagoshirna Space Ctr

Kagoshima

Japan/lSAS

31 15. N

131 05 E

Tan&gashima Space Ctr

Tanegashima

JapanlNASDA

30 24 N

130 58 E

Woomera Launch SHe

Woomera

AustrailalU.S.

31 07 S

136 32 E

IsraeD Launch Complex

Yavns

Israel

31 31 N

34 27 E

734

Launch Systems

18.2

Section 6.4 discussed the relationship between the desired orbital inclination and
the required direction of launch from a specific launch site. The direction of launch, or
launch azimuth, depends on range safety considerations that prohibit flying over
certain land and ocean areas. Figure 18-7 shows the launch azimuths and inclinations directly available from the U.S. Eastern and Western launch sites. The Japanese
have only two 45-day launch periods, one in the spring and one in the winter. At other
times, the launch would threaten fishing fleets by dropping booster parts into the

fishing area.

Vandenberg Air Force Base
38

z

Kennedy Space Center

36

I

;

32

~L-~~-L~__L-~~~

124

122

120

118

longitude (deg W)

116

82

80

78

longitude (deg W)

76

Rg. 18-7. Orbit IncUnations and Launch AzImuths Available from the Eastern and Westem
Ranges. In general, low-Inclination orbits are possible from the East coast and highIncDnation orbits are possible from the West Note that orbital Inclinations available
from these launch sites depend on launch azimuth.

Given a choice of launch sites and launch dates, we must consider weather at the
launch location. Bad weather can severely restrict chances to launch, thus costing time
and money. The site's location and time of year determine surface weather and winds
aloft. For example, Florida and French Guiana have many thunderstorms and frequent lightning during the spring and summer. Because the highly ionized gas in the
launcher's exhaust plume can attract lightning, we must launch carefully in these seasons. During the winter, the winds aloft are severe because the jet stream moves to the
south and often passes over both the Eastern and Western Ranges. As a result, we must
study weather information for all possible sites.
Although only a few launc~system vendors operate in the U.S., we can choose
intelligently from many types of launch vehicles. Several government organizations
manage these systems. The Air Force Space Systems Division (AFSSD) developed the
Titan, Atlas, and Delta launchers and matches launchers to users' requests. Air Force
Space Command manages launch operations at DoD launch sites. N~SA manages the
Space Transportation System through NASA Headquarters. Vendors of commercial
launch vehicles contract services directly with users. Contractors obtain license
approvals to launch through the Department of Transportation, Office of Commercial
Space Transportation.

18.3

Determining the Spacecraft Design Envelope and Enviromnents

735

18.3 Determining the Spacecraft Design
Envelope and Environments
Once we've identified several launch systems for our mission, we must determine
nfiguration of the interfaces between the launch system and payload and underthe environments that the payload must withstand We c~ use the param~ters
for the launch system we select; however, a preferred approach IS to matc~ enVJrOn· terfaces to the combined parameters of several launch vehicles. We
ts and m
men
.
h uld at least develop the information listed in Step 4 of Tab181This
e1 - .
process IS
~:erred to as payload integration, which means doing. the ~agement, pro~ supand analysis required to inte~te the ~. (~cludin~ upper stages) With ~e
r:!'ch vehicle. We must consider this step early m ImSS10n design. The payload design
t address launch environments and interfaces, whereas the launch system must
~ the payload during ascent. If we don't integrate these ~ks carefully, problems
in designing and manufacturing the. payloa~ can scuttle or senously del!ly ~e la~h.
Payload integration must meet specific ~men~ ?~ the ~gram reVIew, mcluding
interface control documents at both the Flight Feaslbihty ReVIew and the Cargo Integration Review.
. the
In the spacecraft design, we must consider the payload environm~nt f~ ~ time .
payload leaves the vendor's facility until the spac~ co~pletes Its ImSSlon. In this
section, we will address the environment from the time we mstall the payl~ad «?D top
f the launch vehicle until it's through the ascent. In many areas, the combinatio~ of.
~gh accelerations and vibrations coupled with the ~~al environment and. rapIdly
changing local pressures result in environmental con~tions m~ se.v~re than It would
ex .ence on orbit Carefully considering these envrronments IS critical to spacecraft
Three areas require particular attention: usable payload volume ~ffered by the
available fairings, structural and electrical interfaces, and payload enVlfODDlents, as
summarized in Table 18-7.
. "
Fairings. Launch-vehicle vendors ort:er a ~ide ~g~ of pa~l?ad fainngs. They
define the usable payload volumes and dimenSions Within the famngs for the ~pace­
craft. These values account for payload and fairing defl~tions due .to stati~ and
dynamic loa~s encountered during ascent. Table
proVIdes aPF.>ximate dimensions for various systems, and Fig. 18-8 shows a typical payload famng.
The mission designer must ensure that the spacecraft will fit within the allowable
envelope. The fairing protects the payload from aerodynamic loads ~d. in general,
provides a benign enyirQnment, as discussed below, to lessen the unpact on ~e
payload Generally the payload fairing is jettisoned late in ~e ascent when dynllllll:c
pressure and the heating rate are below acceptable levels specified by the launch vehicle vendor. Different times can be negotiated, if required. We do not need to analyze
payload and upper-stage combinations which are similar ~ pre~o~l~ fl~wn payloads
as extensively as new or unique payloads, because analysIs by similanty IS ~table.
If available fairings are unsuitable, launch vehicle vendors can develop famngs to
meet unique requirements..
.
The Space Shuttle's cargo bay IS so large that It usually accommoda~ several ~y­
loads. To help planning. the bay is partitioned into four sectors, allocating a specified
amount of electrical power, cooling, telemetry, and so forth, to ew:h-comparable to
that available from a Delta or Atlas vehicle. Larger payloads combme resources from
several sectors to meet their requirements. The cargo bay doors and the ~lage
provide protection equivalent to that of a shroud on an expendable launch vehicle.

th

s:UC:

00:;.

18:4

Launch Systems

736

18.3

Determining the Spacecraft Design Envelope. and Environments

18.3

TABLE 18-7. Launch Vehicle Ascent Environments and Payload Fairing Constraints Must
Be Factored Into the Spacecraft Design Early In the Design Process. Incompatibility found late in the design may require costly revisions or selection of
another (less desirable) launch system.
Typical Value/Comment

Parameter

Atmospheric

Reference
I

Consult user guide
Payload Fairing Envelope
Payload to Launch Vehicle Interface Specified bolt pattem

Ag. 18-8, Table18-4

I
I
I

Launch vehicle
user guides

Environments
Thermal
Pad
Ascent fairing radiant
Aeroheating

10-35 ·C
188 BTU·fl2/hr
100-150 BTU ·fl2/hr

Electromagnetic

Consult range and launch
vehicle user guides

Contamination

Satisfy class 10,000 air

and
ElectrIcal
Interfaces

,
,
,
I
I

I

/

, , - - ..... ... '\

\

I

\

Spacecraft
Should At
Within the

prescribed
Envelope

I
I
I
I

Maximum of 1 psi <flflerential

Ag.18-9

~7g

Table 18-8

Vibration

0.1

Acoustics

140 dB

Ag.18-12

Shock

4,OOOg

FJg.18-11

\
\

\

Air Conditioning
- Cleanliness
- Temperature

I
\

I
I
I
I

--.:

Clearance
(Stay-out Zone)

I

Table 18-9, Ag. 18-10

Structural and Electrical Interfaces. We must identify interfaces between the
payload and the launch system early in the design process. For example, a payload
adapter attaches the payload to the launch vehicle, and we have to determine whether
the payload needs additional support. The adapters physically connect the payload and
any required kick motors, spin tables, separation systems, or electrical interfaces. The
launch-vehicle manufacturer usually provides them, if necessary, tailoring them to
individual requirements. Adapter mass reduces available payload mass, so it is sometimes an important part of selecting the launch vehicle. Examples of booster-adapter
masses are the 51-kg single-launch Type 1666A adapter for the Ariane 4, and, for
dual-launch systems, the 44O-kg Long SPELDA, also for Ariane. Section 11.6
provides a method to estimate booster-adapter weight, but actual weights are in the
launch vehicle users' guide.
Launch-vehicle manufacturers must provide physical, electrical. radio frequency,
and optical access to the payload while the fairing encloses it Effective operations
demand the correct location of access doors and windows for radio frequencies and
optics. In many cases, manufacturers must wire the launcher to command and safe the
spacecraft. They also provide the mechanisms that separate the payload from the
launch vehicle in orbit, typically by using redundant logic and circuitry to trigger
redundant, ordnance-firing systems. High reliability in the payload separation mechanism is important.
The launch system and payload must match the desired communications architecture for launch operations. Communications requirements depend on the combined
demands of the entire space mission: ground stations, payload, launch vehicle, range
safety, and the user. We can adjust launch trajectories somewhat to provide redundant
ground-station coverage during launch if needed. When we cannot get ground
coverage, aircraft can cover critical events. We must check the entire communications

\

: . - - Usable----+:
I
Diameter
I
I
I
Faring ~
Diameter
:

Sec. 18.3

Acceleration

g2/Hz

Launch Site
Mechanical

Launch vehicle
user guides

Venting

737

Electromagnetic
Interference

Access
Panels

FI
g.

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I

Acoustic and
Vibration

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I

I
I

Interface
Attachment
- Mechanical
- Electrical

18-8 Typical Launch-8ystem FaIring. This figure shows a typical payload fairing, illustrat• ing the maximum dimensions and shape of the spacecraft allowed, as well as the
separation plane between the spacecraft and launch vehicle.

architecture before launch if we expect the launch an~ early orbi~ operations to
succeed. Chapter 13 discusses communications networ~ In more detail:
Payload Environments. We need to pay attention to the predic~ p~yload
environments so we can protect the payload during ground transportation, ~
take-off and landing, hoisting operations, launch, and ascent. Table 18-7 hsts the
payload environments that we should assess for pre-launch and launch. The ~upply of
conditioned air to the payload fairing controls the pre-launch therJ?l~ envrr.onment.
Conditioned air typically moves through ducts into the top of the famng, w~e v~nts
near the fairing bottom maintain acceptable press~~ and temperatures. SpecIfications
normally call fOJ; static pressures of about 79 mIlhbars, a temperature range of 9 to
37 DC, relative humidity of 30% to 50%, and air filtration to class 10,000.

I '

738

Launch Systems

18.3

)

~

I,
I,

I

, I
1 '

i

I,
i:

Contamination degrades the performance of solar panels, optical sensors, and
surfaces used for thennal control. Where necessary, we need to control the handling
of particles and molecules from the launcher's out-gassing materials. To model how
contaminants move from source to removal, we analyze the thennal characteristics,
compartment airflow, outgassing properties of materials, qualities and location of
materials. and spacecraft components. We have to consider these analyses from
ground processing through ascent.
Electrical signals must be compatible among the spacecraft bus, the payload. the
launch vehicle, and the launch site. ElectriCal signals of different frequencies and
powers can corilbine to form spurious radio transmissions and electric fields that spoof
systems or fire ordnance devices. Shielding and design of ordnance circuits must
conform to safety regulations at the launch site. For after lift-off, the launch-vehicle
operator defines, documents, and integrates the flight electrical environment. The
payload developer's analysis ensures that the spacecraft is compatible with these
ascent conditions.
The following analyses of ascent environments concentrate on discrete events
where flight experience shows the environment may drive the design. These design
points include ignition and shutdown events, and periods of maximum dynamic pressure, maximum acceleration, peak heating rates, and heat loading.
Several analyses help us define and control the thermal environment for payloads
during ascent. For expendable launch vehicles, we assess the thennal effects due to the
radiant heat from the payload fairing internal surfaces. Maximum temperatures on the
inner wall, of a Delta-ll vehicle range from 25 to 50° C. We also check radiated heat
from the payload fairing or d~rs and free-molecular heating from'rarefied air hitting
the spacecraft after the payload fairing is jettisoned. When we use an upper stage, we
have to consider the thennal effects from being exposed to the space environment
during the parking and transfer-orbit phases. The Shuttle flights require similar analyses. We must consider any extended time the payload is aboard the Orbiter and the
standard abort scenarios. We review results from these analyses to chart effects on
mission operations and to constrain the time that the payload is exposed to the Sun or
deep space while in the Orbiter bay.
Several static and dynamic loads affect the structures of the payload, adapters, and
launch vehicle. These loads are either aerodynamic or they depend on acceleration and
vibration. Aerodynamic loads are a function of the total pressure placed on the vehiCle
moving through the atmosphere. They consist of a static (ambient) pressure and a'
dynamic pressure (tile pressure component experienced by a fluid when brought to
rest). The relationship between altitude and velocity on the ascent trajectory determines these pressures. Payload fairings protect against dynamic pressure up to stated
limits. (If strong winds on launch day result in excessive shear loads, the launch must
be postponed:) At some point in the ascent trajectory the dynamic pressure will drop
to levels which will not damage an unprotected payload; this results from the atmospheric density decreasing with altitude. At this point the fairing may be jettisoned to
lighten the load on the booster. Typically payload fairings are not jettisoned until the
dynamic pressure drops to 05 N/m2.
During ascent a pressure dif(erential occurs between the inside and outside of the
fairing because the ambient atmospheric pressure continuously drops with altitude
while the fairing contains higher-pressure air. Air trapped in compartments and crevices within the fairing and the spacecraft is at a higher pressure until the fairing vents
to the outside. The venting rate depends on the pressure differential between intemaI

Determining the Spacecraft Design Envelope and Environments

18.3

739

d com artments and the fairing, as well as the pressure differential ~tween the
payloae encl:sed within the fairing and the external environment. The venting ra~ ~o
volw:'ds on the size and number of vent ports, on the spacecraft ~d ?n the f~g.
depe 18-9 gives typical data on pressure differentials (pressure lDSlde the faJr?lg
Fi~ ternal ambient pressure) for the Titan-ID. Some values are ranges which
nunUStrae~;ectOry dispersions and uncertainties in the venting rates. We may need to
cover "
durin
t.
vent payload components to prevent damage
g ascen
1.6

e

!b
I
II.

:i

.,

1.4
1.2

"

,/ /

"\

/

0.8

I ~::
I
0.2

_

I

1.0

0.0
-(l.2

. /V
./

r-

/

rl ~

~
\

"\

'"r
"

MIn

-(l.4 0.60.7 0.8 0.91.0 1.1 1.2 1.31'.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.02.1 2.2 2.3 2.4
Mach Number

pressure Differential In the Payload Compartment for TItan-In. This chart shows
FIg. 18-9. the payload compartments pressure relative to ambient air pressure during ascent.
We must know this differential pressure to vent pressure adequately.

The acceleration loads, us~ly called load factors, experienced by the payl~
consist of static (steady state) and dynamic (vi?ration) loads. Table 18-8 s~ows typ1~
values for several launch vehicles, measured m terms of g levels or m~tiples ?f sea
level, gravitational acceleration (9.806 65 mls2 ). Note that w~ must ~one axIalallan~
I teral values In addition to the normal ascent-acceleration an VI tion - ~
g
:Vents, Shuttl~ payloads must look at events on orbit, d~~ re-en~, and dun:
emergency or nominal landings. Figure 18-10 shows the VIbrational ~nVlCODlD.ents. or
several launch systems. These environments consist of }aunch-vehicle acceleratio~,
variable combustion flows in the engines, aerodynamIC drag ~d sh:fi aco;::tiC
pressures from the engines, and the mechanical response of the entire ve c e to ese
stimuli. We must design the payload and booster adapter to carry these loads.
Table 18-9 specifies a lower limit for the fundamental ~uency of~e booster adapter
and spacecraft combination, resulting in a structural stiffness .reqmrement. Howev~,
jf the combination is too stiff, the structure may interfere with the most en7ge:c
vibration frequencies shown in Fig. 18-10. Thus, we need to update.analyseso sta ~
and dynamic loads, so they include more refined data on the desIgn of the lannc
system, booster adapter, and payload.
To separate the launch vehicle from the spacecraft, o~ to deploy spa~ co~
Dents, we typically use pyrotechnic devices. These de~lCes ~ light, highly ~liable,
and easily integrated into mating techniques that proVIde a high de~ of stiffness.
Unfortunately, when activated they generate a shock load that ~ts through the
structure to the payload. Figure 18-11 shows the shock characteristIcs for several
launch systems.

740

r

Launch Systems

18.3

TABLE 18-8. Launch System Acceleration. Steady-state and dynamic components for sev.
eral critical ascent events are shown. We inUst design payloads to survive the surn
of steady state and dynamic accelerations In the axial and lateral directions. When
only dynamic load factors ara given, they Include steady-state load factors. AD
entries ara In g's.
Stage 1
Shutdown
Uft-()ff

Vehicle

AxIal

Lateral

Max A1rloads
AxIal

Lateral

Axlsl

T340nUS
Steady State

Dynamic

+1.5
:t1.5

:t5.0

+2.0

-

:t1.0

:t2.5

±4.0

:t2.0

+0.4
:t12

+5.5
:to.5

:to.5

-

-

010+4.5

-

o to +2.5

Atlas-il
Steady State
Dynamic

+1.3
:t1.5

-

+2.2

:t1.0

:to.3

-

-

Delta
(max· all serles)
Steady State
Dynamic

+2.4
:t1.0

+2.010
+3.0

.-

:t2.0

+4.0
:t2.0

:to.5

-

26
18

30
13
24

15
10
18
15
13
10

* 31 Hz for dual payloads, 18 Hz for single payloads.

1o'000,-----,-----,----...,..,

-

-

+6.0

-

H-II

;"

Steady State

Dynamic

-

-

:t32

:t2.0

+32

+2.5

+3.5

+3.4

-

Shuttle

.

35

Delta 6925/7925
Long March 2E
Pegasus, XL
Proton
Space Shuttle
TItan II

Lateral

±4.0

Fund8mentaJ Frequency (Hz )
Lateral
AxIal
10
15
10

Launch
System
Atlas II, IIA, liAS
Arlane4

(Booster)

Lateral

741

TABLE 18-9. Fundamental Frequencies for Spacecraft DesIgn. The booster adapter and
spacecraft structure should be designed for fundamental frequencies greater than
or equal to those shown.

Stage 2
Shutdown

(Booster)
AxIal

Determining the Spacecraft Design Envelope and EnviromneDts

18.3

Steady State
with IUS
Dynamic

-

-

+1.1 +025 to
to 3.2 ~0.59

-

-

2aVaJues

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

:t5.0

±1.0

+32

+0.59

-

:;.,1,OOOI-----t--T--,r--;'ff---i

-

l

i
-

-

l00I----~~~_iL-t----i

Alias II

101!-:O~----::l::!::OO=-------;l~,OOO;;;;------;l;;;O.OOO
Hz

FIg. 18-11.

DeHaIl

.~'"
10.000
Hz

Rg; 1~1 O.

VibraHonaJ .Envlronment for ~unch Systems. The launch vehicle and fairing dic.
tate the envrronmenl The vertical axis Is the power spectraJ density.
.

Shock Environments for Launch Systems Caused by Staging and Separation
Events.

The acoustic environment is a function of the physical configuration of the launch
vehicle, its acceleration time history, and the configuration of the propulsion system.
The near-launch-pad acoustic environment depends on the refl~ soun~ energy
from the launch pad structures and facilities. The maximum dynamtc enVll'onment
is a consequence of the rate of acceleration and the aerodynamic s~thness of
the launch vehicle shape. Solid-rocket boosters and first stages (often combmed) ~u­
ally provoke a more severe environment, and the smaller the launch vehicle,
the more stressed the payload. In general, the closer the payload is to the launch pad,
the more severe the acoustic environment prior to releasing the launch vehicle, and the
more rapidly the vehicle accelerates, the more severe the environment at maximum
dynamic pressure. Since the acoustic excitation is rapidly time-varying, we m~t
design for the instantaneous values and the overall average. When. the. paylo~ desIgn
is sensitive to the acoustic environment, it is common to add dampmg msulation to the
fairing. Figure 18-12 shows the acoustic environments of several launch vehicles.

r

742

Launch Systems

I(

18.3

Launch Vehicle User Guides

743

I

!
I
I

I

145

Potential integration functions at the launch site include mating the spacecraft with
a stage vehicle, spin tests, loading propellants, mating with the launch vehicle, and
prelaunch testing of all systems (integrated test). Two items to consider are the launchsite layout and how to integrate the payload and launch vehicle. A launch site may
have several pads, so we can integrate several spacecraft at the SaDIe time. Others may
have one pad that restricts the flow to one payload at a time. If the launch site uses a
series approach, launch delays and failures in one spacecraft or launch system may
adversely impact the next program.
Various launch systems use vastly different approaches to physically integrate the
payload and the launch vehicle. The most common is vertical integration, which
means erecting the booster and hoisting the payload on top of it. With this method, we
must build platforms at various levels so we can get to the entire launch vehicle, stage
vehicle, and payload. This approach works. but it is fraught with resbicted access and
safety problems. Another way is horizontal integration, which means securing the
launch vehicle in a horizontal position and attaching the spacecraft. This approach
eases access and lessens safety concerns. Actual payload processing varies according
to the complexity of the spacecraft, and should be examined case·by-case. The time
required at the launch site depends on its design, interface requirements, integrated test
requirements, amount of shared resources, and the launch-site operator's philosophy
and approach.
Following the process defined in this chapter, you should be able to identify several
acceptable launch systems for a particular mission and establish preliminary design
requirements for the spacecraft. The process is an iterative one, and you will probably
need to use it several times prior to converging on the spacecraft design and launch
vehicle.

140

~ I"-.

135

---. 1\

/
~

SPL 125

dB 120

::;...-

.....,

~

Y/

130

-~

\

-

0...
"l

.....,

~ ~\

~~

115

...........

~~

110

"""~ ~
~

105
100
31.5

63

125

250

500

1,000

2,000

4,000

Allasl

1:J1 dB Overall

IJ- TIIan

142 dB

.- Della 792x·9

139.8 dB

<>- Della 792x-l0

144.5 dB

.- ShuI1!e

138 dB

8,000

113 0cIave Band ~ Center Fn!qUency

Rg.18-12.

AcousUc Environments of Typical Launch ConfigUrations Th
represent the sound pressure/eve/ (SPL) of the acoustic energy at ·one-: : e s
ntervals for typical launch configurations. Customarily the payload
Iv
va
~um energy at two points: at ignition before release of ho!d-downs : : : t ~.
~~rnr::'m~~ dynamic pressure (Max q). Delta provides both a 2.9 and ;2o~
provide
:~i~re~~~,:!:::.coUStiCS are different Often shrouds are made to

::n

u!

In· .
syste:C:: ~=y is also important to launch systems. Traditionally, the launch
d
vendors usually stateS:~t!j~~~~:: da: veloci~. I:aunch-system

~tagg:pO!y~aVdethicle. Tablehrol8-10 gives injection a~cw-acies~~~=!ie: ::n~a:
o geosync

TABLE 18-10.

nous transfer orbit

Launch Vehicle User Guides

mba
Injection Accuracy for Geosynchronous Transfer Orbits The
depend on the last stage of the vehicle and type of guidance u~.
ne~
more propellant on the spacecraft to correct errors in inclination and aJ~e at
apogee.

Launch
Systems

wS:'::

Atlas Launch System Mission Planners Guide. February 1995. Lockheed Martin
Commercial Launch Services, Inc., 101 West Broadway, Suite 2000, San Diego,
CA 92101.

Injection AccuracIes
Apogee(km)

Perigee (kin)

InClination (deg)

Delta"

337

0.25

AtlaslCentaur

0.12

82

1.7

0.01

------0. 1

0.03

0.25

0.02

- ArIana~-Shuttle/iUS

Ariane 4. Arianespace, Inc. 1747 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Suite 875, Washington, DC 20006. Ariane Launch Vehicles, rue Soljenitsyns, 91000 Evry, France.

193

Commercial :pelta II User Manual. July 1989. McDonnell Douglas Commercial
Delta, Inc., 5301 Bolsa Avenue, Huntington Beach, CA 92647.
- -

d:~ in the design~ we must consider payload processing and integration

•

process:n~;;;:: =tte~~~~erci~ ~d gOThvemment facilities are availa~
process.'
a~c Sites.
e actual flow depends on specific
able fa::;fti~;refe~ts, confi~~on of propulsion, ordnance elements, and avail.
and
d· ay oa ~ocessmg mcludes receiving inspections checking payload
un
checf: -support eqwpment, installing hardware such as batt~ries and avionics
g pressures and gas leaks, and testing functions and communications.
'

-

Delta n Payload Plannen C--ulde.UciODer 1995~oeing McDonnell Douglas, 5301 Bolsa Avenue, Huntington Beach, CA 92647-2099.
H-I and H-I1 Rocket. NASDA External Relations Department, World Trade Center
Building, 4-1 Hamamatsu-cho-2-chome, Minato-Ku, Tokyo 105, Japan.
Long March Family of Launch Vehicles. China Great Wall Industry Corporation,
No. 17, Wenchang Hutong Xidan, P.O. Box 847, Beijing, China.

n Space
Launch VehiCle Program. Space Launch Systems Division, Martin Marietta
Corporation, Denver Aerospace, P.O. Box 179, Denver, CO 80201.

Payload Users Guide Titan II Space Launch Vehicle. August 1986. Titan

744

Launch Systems

Pegasus Payl~ad U~rs Guide Initial Release. December 1988. Advanced Pro·ects
Office, Orbital Sciences Corporation, 12500 Fair Lakes Circle, Fairfax, VA zi033.
Proton Launch Vehicle and Launch Services Users Guide LKE---(Lockbeed
Krunichev Energia). December 1993 (available' from Lockheed Martin Comm
cial Launch Services).
er-

Chapter 19

Shuttle Orbiter/Cargo Standard Interfaces, ICD 2-19001, NSTS Volume 14
Attachment 1, NASA L. B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX 77058.
'

Space Manufacturing and Reliability

So:~':uncher Proton. Glavcosmos USSR, 103030, Moscow Krasnoproletarskaya

The ~e~ Upper Stage Users Guide. January 1984. Boeing Aero ce Co
DiYlslOn of Boeing Company, P.O. Box 3999, Seattle, WA 98124. spa
., A
TItan ~ Users Handbook. June 1987. Titan IV Space Launch Systems, Martin
Manetta, Denver Aerospace, P.O. Box 179, Denver, CO 80201.

Reference
lsakowitz, Steven J...1995. ~ International Reference Guide to Space Launch
Systems (~nd Edztion). Washington, DC: American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics.

19.1 Designing Space Systems for Manufacturability
Challenges for Manufacturing, Material, Test, and
Launch Processing; Creating the Manufacturing
Vision; Influencing the Design; Process
Development and Verification; Production
19.2 Reliability for Space Mission Planning
Designfor Reliability, Designfor Fault Avoidance,
Fault Tolerance, Test Techniques

19.1 Designing Space Systems for Manufacturabillty
Wade Molnau, Motorola Systems Solutions Group
Jean Olivieri, Motorola Advanced Systems Division
Chad Spalt, Motorola SateUite Communications Group
Historically, satellite manufacturing, integration, and test has been a crafted and
arduous process. Each spacecraft is essentially unique, and is manufactured and tested
appropriately. Commercial satellites, while alleviating some of the major impedances
to fast and efficient satellite manufacture, have fared only slightly better. The advent
of commercial constellations of satellites forces us to seek and develop completely
new strategies. We need to incorporate ideas and methods from other industries into
satellite supply-chains to meet the cost and cycle-time requirements needed to make
space systems compete effectively with their terrestrial counterparts.
This chapter describes a few of the vital changes that need to be addressed to manufacture and test multiple satellites efficiently. These methods and strategies apply to
the whole satellite supply chain, and to piece-part, assembly, subsystem, and spacecraft levels. Chapter 12 detailed methods used to manufacture and test single satellites.
This chapter augments Chap. 12 for multiple satellite systems.
Small satellite systems « 10 spacecraft) may not fully benefit from the methods
presented here, but some points will be applicable. Designing manufacturable satellites and associated production systems requires up-front investments in time, money,
and capital. Each program needs to trade the benefits of these methods with anticipated
investment costs. As the number of satellites grows, the benefits and the usefulness of
these methods increases.
'

745

r

~

746

~pace Manufacturing and ReUabiJity

19.1

We begin with a short description of the. goals and challenges of manufacturing,
material, test. and launch processing organizations. The majority of the chapter then
concentrates on four phases of the manufacturing and test of the spacecraft constella_
tion: (1) creating the manufacturing vision, (2) influencing the design, (3) developing
and verifying the process, and (4) producing the spacecraft.

I

19.1.1 Challenges for Manufacturing, Material, Test,
and Launch Processing Teams
The challenges presented to the manufacture of satellite constellations are
extremely different from those traditionally conceived for spacecraft. These challenges, however, are not muc~ different from those for other commercial products.
Spacecraft are designed and built to cost and schedule goals-just like video recorders
or cars. Figure 19-1 compares a few of the challenges facing the manufacture of a
constellation of satellites, while Fig. 19-2 shows manufacturing issues as they pertain
to key metrics-quality, time, and cost.
Key Metrics

Quality

Traditional

Multl-sateilite

Build, Test, RebUIld, Retest •..

Build, Verify, Ship, Shoot

Spacecraft Cost

66,ooo$/l<g

19,8OO$/kg

Cycle TIme (Integration)

225 days

24 days

Cycle TIme (Build to launch)

18 months

2 months

19.1

Designing Space Systems for ManufacturabiJity

747

sigma me~ods to .verify that the processes are perfonning with high-quality results.
Robust designs USlDg in-control processes will produce high-quality products-without associated high costs and long cycle times. Six-sigma methods are a cornerstone
for lean and agile manufacturing methods (see sidebar).
To meet the additional cycle-time and quality requirements, manufacturing personnel must participate concurrently during the creation of the design. They ate responsible for influencing the design and tailoring the design into a final. producible product.
Finally, manufacturing must effectively integrate the product during production.
In summary, the challenges presented to manufacturing are to recreate the valueadded or useful elements of space hardware design and manufacture. We must eliminate non-value-added activities. We must add elements for quick, efficient. and high
quality execution. We must drive out non-value-added or superfluous activities and
requirements.
The Six Sigma program began in Motorola in 1985 as a means to measure and improve
performance in all phases of its business. The ultimale target is virtually perfect execution.
Sigma (0) is used to designate the distribution or spread about the mean or avemge of any
process or procedure. A simple definition of six sigma is 3.4 defects per million opportunities,
or 99.9997% perfect. Sigma level improvement is not linear. In fact, improvement rates
escalate rapidly as the base sigma level slowly increases.
Six Sigma methodologies are a set of tools and procedures to improve processes. Fundamental methods include problem solving, process control and process characlerization. They
can be applied to any process from engineering to business. For more information, reference
Harry [1997] or Hany and Lawson [1997].

------------------------------

Rg.19-1. Typical Cons1ellatlon Manufacturing Challenges. Note the significant difference
between tracfrtlonaJ space vehicle manufacture and the newer manufacture process.

Material Challenges
• Six-Sigma Quality
- Satellites are not field serviceablel
• Arst to Market ~ Commercial
Leverage the Market ~ GovemmentlMilltery
- Reduce benchmarked cycle time from 225 days to 24 days
per satelnte
• Axed Budget, Commercial PrIcing
- Continuous profit improvement
--------------------~
Rg. 19-2. Constellation Manufacturing Issues. The quality, cycle time, and cost issue relating
to the prodUction of a constenation of satellites are different than those encountered
while producing single sateHites. While quality requirements are different-but stiR
stringent~1e time and cost issues are now paramount.

For instance, time to market often is not only a goal, but a competitive requirement
for viability. Time becomes an overriding factor. This drives not only the overall time
to market. but the time to complete each system element. For manufacturing, this
translates to drastically reducing the cycle time required to produce a satellite.
Quality, as with all spacecraft, is still imperative. Satellites are not field serviceable,
and simple defects can render a satellite unusable. The traditional approach places
emphasis on high-cost and time-consuming quality assurance methods that check and
recheck, test and retest. and verify and reverify the hardware. Instead, we employ six-

Traditional manufacturing drove spacecraft parts to the costliest and slowestdelivery grade-S-level. Unfortunately, these parts are not inherently better than commercial parts-they have just been screened for various properties to improve their
overall expected performance or failure rates. The parts are mostly produced on
commercial part lines and even from commercial part batches.
Our challenge is to use the right parts for the mission-not the highest level parts
available. We need to target commercial parts, replacing them only when required. We
need to discourage military grade or S-level parts, but allow them in situations where
they must be used. A simple comparison of part costs, as shown in Fig.19-3, depicts
the drastic difference for S-level, Mil-spec, and commercial parts. Significant cost
savings can result from selecting lower-cost parts when applicable. As discussed in
Sec. 12.2, significant time savings also can result from selecting lower grade parts.
This yields a significant advantage of using Mil-spec parts over S-level parts. Furthering this comparison, we can receive commercial parts typically even quicker-often
in less than a week.
Parts selection needs to consider producibility, radiation, out-gassing, and other
requirements. We need to consider strongly parts that support efficient manufacturing
methods. We should target parts that use the standard process flows-for instance,
automated placement and mass reflow for electronic assemblies.
Fmally, parts selection needs to be a value-added concurrent engineering activity.
Success· in the material area heavily influences overall program cost and schedule
perfonnance.

748

Space Manufacturing and ReHability

19.1

Designing Space Systems for Manufactorabllity

TRADmONAL

749

MULTI-SATELLITE

0.9

.S-Ievel

0.8

~MII

~ 0.7

o CommercIaJ

0.6

Craft Industry

Lean Satellite ProducUon

• Optimize Locally

• Optimize Supply Chain

1.!!

0.5

• Contracts Based

• Partnership Based

0.4
0.3

• Aerospace Practices

• Commercial Ingenuity

~

0.2

• Performance Only

• Process Driven Design

0.1

• Distributed Factory

• Assembly Une

• Unique Product

• Same Product

o
'0

o
Mixer (SMA86)

LC.(lM139)

FIg. 19-3. Representative Parts PrIce Comparison. Commercial
. .
cost savings over Mil-spec and 8-level parts.
parts represent a sIgnificant

Test Challenges
The test function drives the overall cycle tim f
.
true not only for traditional satellites but for ~ 0 teria~ecraft delivery. This holds
design test as a process-this includes :ninimizin ns a~ons as ~e~: The key is to
and achieving high-quality results.
g cycle time, maxuDlzmg throughput,

ass~~&~s:!~;::;~~~~~~=!~tfy0 ~erify the adequacy of th~ design and

cesses-are inherently different.

ese two elements-deslgn and pro-

Design verification, more commonly called qualification testi
.
.
and thorough analysis of performance capabilities This still .ng, r~urres detai~ed
process that includes functional test, vibrati
.
IS a time-consummg
?n and ~hock, therm~ va~uum, electromagnetic compatibility and other tests
essentially involves testing the satellite t' This may mclude multiple Iterations, and
back and ultimately eliminate these ~fi~ter than expected levels. We should cut
th d '
W
q
Ication tests after we understand and
f
savings in time and money by relinqUishi:;:e

n~d ~full_:Pc::~~:ee~:~~t

Conversely, process verification continues throughout th
od .
spacecraft. These tests only verify the rti
e pl1 uction of the
ormance
include only simple perfiormance cbeckspe Th
°lf the production system and
thr gh
.
• e contro of the individual
ou out the production cycle ensures the high uali
PJ10Cesses
the spacecraft would be redundant d
al -q
ty results. Complete testing of
principles oflean production Fi~19~n; ue added-an.d not consistent with the
tional spacecraft production ~d lean prod!~::. some key differences between tradi..
In reganls to components, subassemblies d b "
achieve their qualification testing and prod ~ an . su systems, It IS ~tical that they
detect quickly issues with design or
u :mng?S early as poSSIble. We need to
ess
understood components subassembf . e can mte~te high quality and welltion level testing-with high confi: an~su~syste~ WIth no additional integraincremental processing-usually nl nhi~'. t mtedgration, we need to verify only
o y s ppmg an connection.

Rg. 19-4. Lean Satellite ProducUon Principles Compared to Traditional Craft PJ1oducUon.
Lean production methods originated In the automobile Industry. These methods can
be appDed to the production of satellites as well. See Womack et aI. [1990) for in depth
discussion of lean manufacturing.

In summary, test provides possibly the greatest opportunity for significant cost and
cycle-time improvements. Intelligent selection of reduced testing, clear distinction
between design and process verification, and performance of lowest-level testing
greatly enhances the cost-effective, high quality,low cycle-time production of spacecraft without significantly increasing risk.

Launch Processing Challenges
After finishing integration and test, we package and ship the satellites to the launch
site for processing and preparation for launch. Traditionally, this has been a complex
and time-consuming segment of the "satellite delivery process. The requirements for
building a multi-satellite constellation include quick and efficient processing of satellites for launch. These requirements may also force the use of multiple launch sites and
launch-preparation areas, further driving the need for standardized and simplified
launch processing.
We need to consider launch-site pJ10Cessing from the start of the program. We
should target decisions and trades that support simplified processing. Changes and
processing are much easier to handle while at the integration factory. This is where the
facilities and skill levels are the most available. Launch-site processing typica1ly takes
place at a remote location-often not owned or operated by the satellite manufacturer-that makes processing more difficult.
The spacecraft are transported to the launch-site processing area via protected \ "
. /"
environment or container. The container environment must provide for temperature,
humidity, vibration, and shock protection during the shipping process. In oroer to
support the streamlined processing of the satellites upon their arrival, the shipping
process is subject to basic process control. We deem the process to be successful as
long as the required parameters-temperature limits, humidity limits, vibration levels,
and shock levels-are not exceeded. If these parameters exceed their limits, we need
to perform in-depth analysis or additional testing at the launch-site. But, if none of the
parameters are exceeded. the satellite can continue with the streamlined process flow
that contains little, or preferably no, testing.

J

I

750

Space Manufacturing and ReUability

I

I;

I'

I
I

I

751

Figure 19-5 depicts a streamlined launch-site

~I the steps needed to prepare the spacecraft ~ ~ow. The. ~ess~g includes

I

Designing Space Systems for ManufacturabiJity

19.1

I,

tion. Launch team members receive .
ppmg condition to flight condi_
package, and transport the space v~hi~~~ load onto the I~unch dispensers, fue~
monitor the flight batteries, which may be install~ ~~unCh vehicl:. They charge and
craft are mounted on the launch vehicle.
the launch SIte, when the space-

.......

~

Transport to
Launch-site

Install
Dispenser
Into Can

M

~

ReceMng
Inspection and
Process Control

Transfer Can

to f>adII..aunch

Vehicle

LoadSV(s)
on Dispenser

M

Battery
~ Charge
and Monitor

~

r--a-

Fuel and
PressUrize
SV(s)

t-

Countdown
and Launch

Fig. 19-5. Streamlined launch-Site Process Flow T
take several weeks. Streamlined rocessl • radltlonal launch-site processing can
port to launch) to less than two W~ks. ng can reduce the overall cycle time (trans-

We remove alI. difficult tasks that can be driven to earlier
.
. _ .
hazardous operations. For instance we Can re I
processmg. We lllIIlIInize
replaced with other mechanisms We' sh uld . ~ ~e depl?~nt ordnance can be
the hi .
.
0
mmInllze or eliminate test
.
. . operations. If
s ppmg process was in control (e.g. no limits exceeded
need no test verification of the process. Well-designed tooli~n shlppmg sensors), we
ment can make the remaining processes quick d ffi .
. g ~d process developto the spacecraft.
an e Clent WIth little threat of damage

19.1.2 Creating the Manufacturing Vision

~e of the most important factors relating to a successful
.
creation of a manufacturing vision More and
production program is the
c~:aper, faster" solutions to their product nee:~:=~ers today want the "better,
VISIOn based on the customer's and the
~
create the manufacturing
entire project team must embrace this visi::~1 s ~rrec.tations for. the product. The
..
.
p es mvolved WIth manufacturing
must share the manufacturi
with the program from the ::r~s~:i~p~:S:~:o include e~eryone else involved
crea~ manufacturing goals to support the vision Cgh ~uction
and t~t. We must
g
quality, c?,cle time and cost must directly rela~ to":tin manufa~g. ~oals for
e manufacturing VISIon. For
example, If there is a manufacturing vision to od
constellation in a single year then the manuf: pI' ~ce enough satellites to populate a
These goals must be in the form of quantified s~:nng Igo~S must reflect this vision.
els and quantified costs. Once the manufacturin cyc e ~, quantified quality levexecute these goals and pursue the manufacturing g?~S are m place, the next step is to
~':t constantly measure
the progl'ess towards meeting these goals and sh!eV1~~,:
uate p~gress and make necessary changes to achieve the
team. We must evalstated g~als. Chan~es may
occur m the design or in the production and test
proces~es to meet the manufacturing goals is an i~·
Chan~g th~ desIgn and
process
· It IS a .gIve and take
scenano where the sum of the changes equals achi . ve
evmg the manufacturing goals.

t'

.

.!:

Establish Goals
We must es~blish goals in the areas of cycle time, quality and cost. In today's
competitive environment, these areas are everything. Many times multiple companies
have similar ideas and the only differentiating characteristic between their products is
which one makes it to the consumer market first and captures the majority of the
market share. Missing the time to market goals will cost a company market share,
revenue and brand equity. Therefore we need to know up front when our product must
be ready for our customer and then determine our cycle time goals to support this
overall schedule.
As stated previously, one of the unfortunate aspects of building satellites is that they
are usually not field serviceable. If there is a quality problem after we launch the product into space, we have to live with the degraded performance or,in an extreme case,
accept that the product does not meet our mission requirements. We must establish
quality goals so that we can design our product accordingly. When we choose components for our product and select processes to build and test o~product, we determine
our resulting quality levels. As we choose components and processes we need to
calculate our cumulative quality predictions and track them to our goals. We will then
have the visibility to see what components and processes have a positive or negative
impact on the overall product quality. With this data we now make informed trade-off
decisions. We can determine which components or processes to change to increase the
product quality. Often quality drives cycle time. If a product is designed with low quality levels then we should expect to perform more rework and additional testing. This
in tum adds cycle tiine. Haroware designed around robust processes which exhibit low
defect rates result in pI'oducts with fewer defects which leads to less test time, less
rework and lower costs.
.
Most customers desire low-cost solutions. More and more of the traditional "cost
plus" projects are being proposed as fixed price contracts. The days of cost-plus
contracts and cost overruns being absorbed by the customer are quickly disappearing.
Today the contractor carries the burden of performing to an agreed-upon fixed price.
Because of this, the contractor must know the cost goals arid understand how they are
going to perform to these cost goals. Performance to cost goals directly relates to
performance to cycle time goals and quality goals. The addition of unplanned cycle
time and of effort l'equired to correct quality problems result in increased cost. In
general any unplanned work results in additional cycle time and in additional costs.

Involve Manufacturing Early
Manufacturing early involvement may not always be the accepted way of doing
business. Early manufacturing involvement allows the design team to be informed
regal'ding the effects of their choices on doWllstream manufacturing and test operations. It empowers the design team to make informed decisions and predetermine the
expected cycle time, quality and cost performance of the assembly and test operations.
It allows management to be aware of what to expect when the product reaches assembly and test.
Getting the design team to accept concurrent engineering can be a difficult task.
Many times a company needs a culture change for everyone to embrace the early
participation of manufacturing. Management must support concurrent engineering and
must pay attention to the analysis results created by the manufacturing representatives.
The manufacturing and test participants on the concurrent-engineenng team must
embrace the manufacturing vision and possess the tools to influence the design to meet

~i
Ii

Designing Space Systems for Manufacturability

752

Space ManufacturiJJg and ReHabillty

19.1

this vision. They must show the other members of the design team that their participation is value-added and that early team involvement will save the program time and
money in the long run. Everyone on the project team must share the manufacturing
vision in order for it to become reality.

Select Parts and Processes Effectively
As was discussed earlier the sum of the project's individual process cycle times
(both design and manufacturing/test) must support the overall cycle time goals and the
manufacturing vision. Cycle time is inherent in the design. We predetermine the cycle
time to assemble and test a product when we choose parts and processes for a
particular product. Therefore, during the product design phase we must give appro..
priate detail to the proper selection of parts and processes. Overall the design team
must realize that a design consists of parts and processes. Often the choice of a
particular part will dictate the use of a particular process. This relationship is what
gave rise to the phrase ''pick a part, pick a process". Often design engineers choose
parts that meet a limited set of criteria from which the design engineer is searching.
They often do this without knowing the downstream impacts that these part choices
have in assembly and test.
Therefore it's important to have manufacturing and test representatives involved in
the part selection process. They can perform analyses to show how certain parts may
require additional process steps which have lower process yields leading to more
defects, higher cycle times and ultimately higher costs.
An electronic assembly example of this type of analysis is shown in Table 19-1. We
can extend this analysis to satellite design and manufacture. Part X and part Y are
equivalent in the areas of form, fit and function; therefore we would assume that the
parts are interchangeable. However the parts vary greatly when we address associated
processes, process yields and overall cost Part X is an 84-lead ceramic quad flat pack
that must have the leads formed, trimmed, and tinned. The part must then be loaded
into a tray for presentation to the part placement (pick and place) equipment. Form,
trim, tin and tray placement are non-preferred processes. We must perform these
processes in-house, which contributes to increased process time for that part type. The
low process yields associated with these non-preferred processes drive this part to contribute 0273 defects per unit (OPU) which leads to increased cycle time and costs
associated with rework and potential test failures. Part Y is an 84-lead plastic quadflat
pack that comes to us formed, trimmed, tinned and loaded on tape and reel to be
presented to the pick and place machine. This part uses only preferred processes which
leads to lower process cycle times, lower defects per unit and lower rework costs. All
of these factors are reflected in the lower total cost of Part Y. Therefore when selecting
a part the design team must look at the downstream impact of their part selection and
include the total cost impact of the part in their design tradeoffs.
By relating parts to processes we can determine the expected time to manufacture
and test a product, the associated quality level and the overall cost. Once we make
these estimates we can perfonn ''what if' analyses to see if other part/process combinations will make attaining the cycle time, quality and cost goals more realistic. We
perform this iterative process early in the design phase, so we can include many design
tradeoffs between aU of the disciplines.
Parts have many attributes that influence the effectiveness of manufacturing
processes. Some of these attributes fall into the categories of cost, interchangeability,
availability, reliability and simplicity. Early part-supplier involvement is critical to

753

19J
TABLE 19-1. Pa

.--

rtJP rocess Cost RelationshIp
Part

part

Package

Cost

ProceSS8S
Used

Process
DPU

Lead formltrim 0273
part 84GQFP $25.00 1.
2. Lead tin
X
3. Pick & place
-tray
4. Oven reflow
0.00306
$17.50 1. PiCk &place
Part 840FP
-tape
Y
2. Oven reflow

Process
Total
TIme Assembly Rework Cost
Cost
Cost
(Hr)
$40.95 $69.15
$3.20
0.05

0.002

$0.128

$0.459 $18.00

..-

. The suppliers need to know what
ensure acceptable levels in aU of ~ese ca~gon;~ su lier also needs to understand
our cost goals are for the parts bemg s~pli~'interacJ~th our design. The supplier .
our product design and ho~ the~upplier P . ate variables to control to ensure that the
can work with us to deterID1ne . e appropn lier also needs to understand our propart is interchangeable and reli~l:;!gee~~t philosophy in order to make sure that
duction schedule and our maten

~:~a::yab~pt~': =~~ec~~~:

their parts
has an impact on process deusuallvelopPart cost uu.......
used to assemble high-cost parts are . Y
T ' call this leads to higher
ment and process execution. Processes
.
.
designed with additional con~ls and verifica~~~ anYJ~or! engineering involvestress levels for the ~opl~ domg the ~s:~l~ost parts drives the desire to perform
f
ment for process venfication. ~a: 0 are in the event of unwanted process variatio~.
more rework rather th:u;' sc~p . . ; .
product design regardless of the production
uick! translates into less
Part interchangeabibty IS cotiC m a
quantity. The ability to remove and replace a com:n:!~ fOrr:.. fit and functio~ for
h
non-value-added time. Interchangeable parts ave t
process control to insure that
all parts. The supplier of interchangeable ~:te':~angeable. If a part is not truly
the parts coming into the asse~bly area : s ~ additional time to alter mechanical
interchangeable, assemblers Wlll h~vefi
pe rform additional tests to adjust for the
characteristics of the part to make It t or pe
varying ~rfo~ance. of~e ~ies to part cost, interchangeability, availa?ility and
desi the lower the cost. A sunple part
Part slmpitclty direc y re a.
reliability. Typic~ly the more.s:rle.:e'~~eSigngntherefOre it will positively impact
will have less vanables asSOC1~
WI 1
il'
simple part will require less prothe component reliability and mterchan~;b 1('cause scrap Therefore a simple part
•
duction set up time and have fewer van es 0
should be more. ~v~abl~ !or use. . . '
uct flow in the assembly area. We
Part availability IS cotical to mamtammg prod
ail bili'ty Many times the
mbl process due to parts unav a
.
never want to stoP. the. ~. Y ned b creating material inventories. However,
risk of part unavailability IS contro .
·th carrying part inventories. Typically
Wl
• al storage near its point of use.
there can be a great deal of cost assOCla
we must allocate valuable fact~ry flO: sra~e ~ ~s to store it in a stock room and
An alternative to storing matenal o~ e:c 0 need it Both of these scenarios result
n
~e and btcrease the risk of having large
move the material to the assembly 1in~r
in material being stocked at the assem Y oca on
. rework/retrofit if there is a
quantities of parts that may ~ome o?thsolet~:esr:!::ariOs is to have "just in time"
design change. The best alternative to el er 0

A

J

t

754

.!

., 1I
;

)

Space Manufacturing and ReHabillty

19J

suppliers. Working with Just In Tune suppliers requires less stocking activities and
hence less chanc~ of ha~g vast amounts of product that has to be reworked or retrofitted ~hen th~ ~s a desIgn change, but can add risk. The supply chain informationespecIally del~venes, cycle times, and quaIity-must be well understood to make Just
In Time plausI~le: If not well understood and reliable, Just In Time is very risky.
Once ~tenallS ready for production it is time to use our manufacturing processes
In the tyPICal aerospace manufacturing environment. processes were developed ~
the desIgn. so the. product co~d be manufactured and tested to meet the customer's
needs. Before the Implementation of concurrent engineering this meant that the design
was ''thrown over the wall" to manufacturing and manufacturing did "what ever it
takes" to build, test and deliver the hardware to the customer. Typically this meant that
the processes were highly flexible, required specially skilled workers. lacked good
~ontrol and -:vere. seldom characterized. Today with the advent of concurrent engineermg,. w~ desIgn m the controlled and repeatable manufacturing processes from the
begmmng and the manufacturing output is highly predictable.
Co?current engineering has brought about a change of attitude regarding manufacturing processes in the aerospace industry. No longer do we perform processes just
beca~ "that is the way we've always done them." High-quaIity processes are characterized, controlled and repeatable. Many of these processes have been borrowed
~m the commerci~ manufacturing world. The mass reflow of electronic assemblies
I~ an .example of.this exchange. Mass reflow--t1te mass soldering of parts on printed
C1fCwt boards usmg a single, controlled thermal cycle-was developed to efficiently
produce electronic products for delivery to consumers. Although slow in gaining
accep~ce, we now use it for spaceflight hardware and other high reliability
applicatiOns.
~e concurrent manufacturing engineer should never be afraid to ask ''why'' we
?eslgn ?r process something the way we do. An example of this is to look at the
IDte~tion of dep!oyables on a satellite. In the past certain deployables have always
been mtegrated WIth the satellite in the vertical position. This was done to minimize
!he amount o~ stress that coul? be preloa~ into the deployable mechanisms. Changmg.the satelli~.from th: h~ontal posItion to the vertical position and back to the
honz?ntal JX?sltion ~wres time, space, additional tooling and creates a lot of risk
assocIated WIth handlIng the satellite. With today's modem analysis tools much of the
s~es associated with preloading the deployable mechanisms in the horizontal position can be modeled and the risks analyzed. If the risks are determined to be low
en~u~ then th: satellite plane change from horizontal to vertical can be eliminated.
This ~l save time, space, and tooling and also reduce handling risk.
TypI~ally satellite manufacturing has been a low-volume process. Currently many
cO.mpames are Pf?posing multi-satellite constellations. These multi-satellite projects
drive"manufac~g"to create production lines for assembling and testing satellites.
The ~~bly lme concept of these satellite production lines has roots in the
automotiv~ mdustry. Many of the new satellite production lines take mass production
assem?ly l~e ~hnology one-step further and implement many of the "lean" manuJactunng ~ctpl.es ~?t1y used in the automotive industry. Some of these "lean"
manufa~turin~ pnnctples mclude Just In Time suppliers, supplier partnering concurrent engmeenng, pull production," and statistically controlled processes
'
Other satellite manufacturers have taken the ''lean'' manufacturing ~hilosophy to
th~ n~xt step- ~agile" manT4acturing. "Agile" manufacturing incorporates all of the
pnnctples used m "lean" manufacturing with the addition of flexibility. An "agile"

Designing Space Systems for Manufacturabillty

755

manufacturing line can support multiple product lines on the s~e assembly line: It
also can adapt and respond to product changes which may be directed by cbangmg
ustomer wants and needs.
c One of the guiding principles behind "lean" and "agile" manufacturing is waste
elimination. We must evaluate all of the processes associated .W!~ assem~ly and test
. terms of value-added activities and non-value-added actiVIties. During process
:evelopment and implementation, we should maximize the value-added processes and
the non-value-added activities should be minimized. Reduction of the non-valueadded process steps will drive w~te e~ati~n. .
.
Reduction in the number of mspection pomts IS a good e~ample of waste e~ination. Typically satellite production programs have had a high content of. quality
inspection points. Inspection points are ex~ples of non-value-added operations- In
the past multiple inspection points were required because the assembly ~ ~ere
highly variable and uncontrolled. By institutionalizing concurrent engmeenng,
processes are now designed into the assembly flow that are controlled and ~Ie.
Because the output of these processes are predictable, we ~o longer need multiple
inspection points. Therefore we eliminate waste by removmg the non-value-added
inspection steps.
. '
.
Another non-value-added recurnng process IS test. Because test IS non-~a1u:added, we need to be minimize it to eliminate waste. Although some t:&ting IS
required. we should minimize redundant testing. One of the benefits ~f us1l!g controlled and repeatable processes is that the output from these ~ IS predictable.
Therefore we don't have to test something that has been tested earlier if we know that
the processes used after the initial test have not inj~ variab~l?' ~to !he product. A
ood example of this principle is the previously-mentioned minimiZation of launch~te processing. We test the spacecraft prior to shipping it to the launch ~te. and don't
test it at the launch site unless shipping indicators or sensors show that It exceeded a
shipping process limit.
. '
Test is just another process. During the early phases of desIgn, we should VI~w ~
assembly and test efforts as processes that must be con~olled and repeatable. Similar
to satellite manufacturing processes, we should be establIsh goals ~or all test processes.
These goals should relate to cycle time, quality ~c~ed test. Yl~lds), and cost. We
should question anynon-value-added steps and, If possIble, eliD11D~e ~em. If a ~t
continually exhibits a 100% yield rate then we need to determme if the test IS
necessary.
. '
I I
Reality is that test yields are not always 100% and finding defects at high.er eve s
of integration can negatively impact cycle time an.d cost. ~e go~ of performmg a test
is to find the defect at the lowest possible level of mtegration. This reduces the amount
• Pull Production Systems

. based on a push system.
Traditional satellite manufacture and mass production in general IS

In other words, the material and work-in-process is generally pushed or ~ thro:ugh the
system. The empbasis is on processing the hardware through the productlon line as qmckly as
possible. Unfortunately. this can create pockets of ineffici~ncy and bottlenec:ks (throughput
limiters). These problems require excess factory space for mventory of matenal and product.
and can create excessive defects and cycle times.
.
.
•
Lean production utilizes a pull production methodology. Matenal and work-m-process IS
not processed until upstream stations are ready. Downstream ~ ~ not create ex~
inventory, beca~ the production system will not allo~ production to con~nue ~ly.
The system is tuned for a continuous process flow, With necessary mateIials bemg delivered
Just In Tnne in small quantities.

756

Space Manufacturing and Reliability

19.1

of time and effort required to get to the problem area and fix it Even after tests have
been perfonned there are instances when the quality of the lower level hardware may
still be suspect at the higher levels of integration. Therefore it is important to design in
accessibility at the higher levels of integration. We may need this accessibility to
repair a defect that has passed undetected through a lower level test operation or to
incorporate late design modifications prior to sealing the satellite. Design for accessibility needs to be a goal of the program vision because it doesn't happen without
conscious effort. For a detailed discussion of process design and production trends, see
Shunk [1992].

757

Designing Space Systems for Manufacturability

19.1
100

t;
0

80

0

I&.

0

#w
>

5
::l

19.1.3 Intluencing the Design

Success of production depends on the manufactwinglproduction disciplines being
involved throughout the product design. Through concurrent engineering, we develop
the product involving various disciplines of the trade. For satellite design, this includes
such expertise as electrical, mechanical, software, test, industrial, and reliability
engineering; it also includes other less-technical but equally important functions such
as contracts, finance, procurement and scheduling. The manufacturing role, in particular, acts as the main interface between many product teams due to their direct responsibility of ensuring a producible product. All experts must get involved with the design
early and continually to the extent they can influence the product to meet their respective goals or to compromise with others. At the very least, if the experts can't reach an
acceptable term, they can highlight the issue very early in the program so that they can
continually work it into an acceptable term.
To influence the design, the program team must first establish a common vision for
the enterprise. This common vision serves to create a working platfonn that allows the
supply chain to collectively communicate. It provides the central theme to which the
program will focus regardless of where anyone's portion of the business is located.
The common vision creates the need for goals and guidelines in each concurrent
design area within the program. Overarching goals must be established to provide
incentive for the program; they should be difficult to attain, yet attainable within the
program life.
To supplement the goals, the team must establish specifically defined rules and
guidelines to bring the goals to fruition. The vision, goals, and guidelines provide the
program with a standard, central direction that, in turn, provides the program with the
opportunity to be efficient and united. The intention of a common vision is not to strip
individual company identity, rather to converge on certain business ideas that alleviate
challenges due to diverse mindsets, backgrounds, and corporate cultures.
Designing to goals and guidelines sounds simple but may be difficult in practice;
few programs have these clearly outlined at the inception of the program. implementing goals at the beginning of the program is where they are most effective. Studies
have shown that approximately 70% of the cost of the system is fixed by the end of the
conceptual design phase [Wade and Welch, 1996].
A concept becomes feasible through refinement and, in turn, producible through
other iterations of refinement If we initiate the guidelines of design at the conceptual
level, it is less costly and less painful to iterate to a feasible design. The cost to correct
problems occurring from a previous program phase increases by an order of magnitude, approximately (Fig. 19-7). A simple design change during the conceptual design
phase will cost lOx during broadband phase and l00x during engineering model
phase.

::i

::l

Cost Reduction
OpportunItieS

0

Adapted from Wade and Welch [1996). The ultlProject Phase/Cost Assignmetlynt.infl anced by decisions made early in the product
mate costs of a system are grea
u
life cycle. Based on model fit to empirical data.

Rg.19-6.

>1,000

Ii;

~-------------r--~

>100

0
0

w

>

~w

................
.........
........ .. . . . . . . .
..................
................
................

>10

II:

<1 """'...,...,rrTT77'1

. . . . . . . .
.. ................
. . . . .. . . .
. . . . . .. .. .. . . . . . . . .

. . . ...........
. . . . . ...

Concept

BreadbOard

engineering
Moclel

flight

DEVELOPMENT PHASE

I Corrective Action. Adapted from Wade and

Fig. 19-7.

~:Ic~e~::,~. ~~ r::=~~ng a design problem escalates rapidly as the
design matures.

The feasible design should already be largely.configured to the g?a1s :;:; therefo~;
iterating to the production level shoulhd ~ relati~::l=::Oghthili~::::aterm
smoother because the team knows w at IS expec

::;:.s

i

l

II
~

II
I

II

I

I'

i

i

Ii

I'I,

Designing Space Systems for Manufacturabllity

758

Space Manufacturing and Re6abillty

19.1

Production goals and guidelines should include all production-related information
for the product. This information encompasses the expectations for both parts and
processes as these two ingredients form a product. It also provides structure for the
product to grow properly since it addresses quality, capabilities, production rates,
facility requirements, procurement, cost, warranty, manufacturability, testability, etc.
For example, The design dictates product quality. If the product has a 2-sigma design.
the best we can expect is a 2-sigma product.
Knowing the expectations initially not only assists the product to mature into production, and assists the product team to develop. Having these goals gives the team a
purpose to commonly focus their attention. Successful teamwork resolves issues
seemingly otherwise unresolvable. Communication becomes clearer and less conflicting because the team uses common terms to explain the common goals. A good product team forms to produce a working product without relying upon functional titles and
positions. Additionally, trust forms within the team. Yet, trust and competition are not
mutually exclusive. Team members may and will form partnerships with competitors
for different projects or products, but this practice must not hinder the primary business relationships. Lack of trust causes program inefficiencies.
Initially, the prime contractor must derive the goals and guidelines; however, the
suppliers must then work closely with the prime contractor to further develop,
understand and modify the expectations as necessary. In any event, if team members
don't understand or believe the goals, the team's ability to influence the design is
diluted, and the prime contractor must begin to educate them about the goals.
Furthermore, it is especially important to derive the goals so they are meaningful. For
example, assembly time of a high volume, high complexity product (indicative of the
constellation satellite industry) typically comprises less than 35% of the overall cycle
time while production test comprises the remaining 65% (Olivieri [1997]). Using the
Pareto approach we find that the greatest opportunity to influence the design is in
production test'".
Design influence is most effective through mathematical analysis. Personal bias
and tradition are not the basis for influence. When we select a part for a product, we
inherently select the process as well. This means that predicting behaviors (quality,
reliability, cycle time, assembly process, etc.) of the product is possible. We do this by
collecting data from suppliers but where data is not available we either run an experiment or locate like-product data. Key predictions include, but are not limited to: defect
per unit, defects per million opportunities, statistical tolerance and variability assessments, design to unit production cost, solids modeling, cycle time, process modeling
and mapping, design of experiments, and simulations.
Having the data equates to having the knowledge to influence design. The only way
we achieve key goals in areas such as quality, manufacturability, and profit is if they
are designed in.
Influencing the design is an enterprise challenge. Awareness of our up and down
stream product map helps us make smart decisions for the overall progtam. Locally
• The Pareto Principle
If we rank order contributors to a problem from greatest influence to least influence, the
Pareto Principle states that only a few of the contributors will comprise the bulk of the influence. In general, 80% of the contribution comes from 20% of the factors. Pareto analysis is a
technique for ranking items according to their contribution and analyzing the top contributors,
or the "vital few." The other 80% of the factors that only influence 20% of the contribution
are the "trivial many."

759

19.1

.
bl
e and other areas of importance, does 110t
aJ{.iJnizing cycle time, quality, assem yeas
gram Standardiiation of analysis
rall
th
m
.d th same benefit to e ove
pro
.
h •
always pro.VI e::s d .delines help to relate design impacts to the supply c alD.
tools, metncs, go ,an gut
14 Process Development and Verification

. '

19'~aIity, and the ~ulting~fficie~~~::m;::n~:;;::;:nm::=J~ : :

result of good design practices an. dir imce Si ifieant process development
tion of management and execution Ig
uti' gn
high quality products. For
addi
. · · t i must take place to man acture
band verification ac~VI es eed
I these methods at alllevels-suppIiers, su
ufactunn
gd' we n blYto: ~est, space vehicle \ntegration, and laUllch
satellite
tier suppliers, payloa assem
operations.
. d fi a process as any activity that changes or
In the manufacturing con~xt, we e ne The objective is to use simple, uncomtouches the product or ~;::r:
results with short cycle times. Very few
plicated processes that yt~
without development. Therefore, soun.d devel~
processesthmodseet!e:yge~e e:
is to have controlled and repeatable high-quality
ment me
.
processes during the production phase 0 f the program.

m:m

reso=.
.t.:
;:ru

Development Methods

thods to
and product developWe can apply struc~ development me 't. Here~ afour-phaseprocess
ment. Many methods eXist, anhad most ~~::n,m=odel We should first apply this model
Io .....Oftf a.k.a. process c ractenu-u ov
•
dev e..1'''---'
and then extend it to other processes as necessary.
to cntical processe8h tenza'tion model consists of four phases.
The process c a r n e .abl
Phase 1: Process Definition-Map the process to understand the van es
and characteristics involved.
Phase 2: Process Capabiliti-EstabIish current level ~ performance of the
ess. Does the process perform as needed.
.
..,
In stigate the variables to detemnne
proc
Phase 3: Process Opttml~on- ve
tput Determine the best levels
.
which variables drive the process ou
for these variables to provide optimal process output
'abl
I M 'tor the process and its important van es
ontro
Phase 4: Process c::
- . oru rmance has changed or is out of control.
to determme when Its pem
0
.
the process as necessary. (See Fig. 19-3.)
We iterate the cycle to further unpro~e tify and remove sources of variation.
We characterize the process to 1 en uali .roblems. We use statistical tools,
Ultimately, variation is e cause ~~=~~qpro~! Control, to reduce the variation,
suchasDeSignofExp~nmentsanbseq tI reduces cost and cycle time. See Montuen Y
..
I
.
which improves quality-and su
gomery [1996] for detaIled discussions about statistical too s.

t!t

Cycles of Leorning .
.. th production process we
..
the'te tions caused by charnetenztDg e
.'
In additi~ ~
I r a . when developing satellite constellation producmay need addition~ cycles ~f1eammg ail bl depending on the subject matter.
tion systems. Varymg tec~ques.are av ~ e~ to model and predict performance.
For instance,· we use sunulation techni: processes factories, and whole su.pply
l e,
Discrete event simulation packages can m

760

Space Manufacturing and Reliability

19.1

19.1

DesigDing Space Systems for ManufacturabWty

761

some areas are significantly different. These areas include supply-chain management
and production floor management.

Supply-cluzin Management

4

2

C~)

(ta=)

,,~~
Rg.19-8. Process Characterization Four Phase Model W
improve the product or process.

•

e iterate this cycle to continUally

~hains. We can use these models to detennine resource'
. "
.
mventory schemes, and delivery schedules W
I reqwrements, facility sIze,
established baselines without risk.
. e can exp ore proposed changes to pref
.
A second source of cycles of learnin . th
for physical evaluation-appearance an~I~e ~ ~tof?'Pmg. Prototyping allows
less expensive to make Prod .
enslO -while changes are easier and
devastating. We can po~ntia:;~~:i~h:~~u~~elY costly, .and potentially
[)yno.mic Test Models and Engineering Development M aIlSprot0!rmg . The ~e of
examples of prototypes.
0
are a vanced functional
A third source is the use of pathfind'
. ..
ore complex a system and
its lOgistics, the more beneficial pa~~acttv:~s:
building a scale re resentation
g ac Vlties
ome. They revolve around
handlin manufa p .
' ~ly 1:~, ~~ a product and using it to simulate all
ing anliteratin Cturing, and lOgIstical actiVIties. For satellites, this includes practic-

n::

!aunch processi::'v~~ ~=g~:~:~st:~:t ~o integration.processing to
mg, mechanical checkfit verification docum p tati . g mclude handlmg streamlinmei:' tooling impro~~ment, facility develop;::nt, :dl:::::~t, ~~ developImp IcatJon.
short, any activIty that we can simulate or realize bef,
back, .
. ?~ we create an actual
product can have sigIJificant
to gain significant process an~~t ~:~~:;;e~ese aCtiVIties are important tools
19.1.5 Production
All of the previous phases--.creating the manuf:
.
. .
.
design, and process development--lead to the final ~g VISIon: mfluencing the
goals are to make this h
.
P ase-produCtion. All previous
phases becomes
ase easy to execute. Failure or lack of attention in the previous
gets, and poor quality. Y apparent here. They surface as schedule slips, exceeded budecuting the overall plans and goals established in the earlier ph
.

reamf

W:

e many production issues are similar for building one sateUit:S: ~n~~=

A supply-chain focus is key to the successfully executing the production phase of
a multiple satellite program. The supply-chain is defined as all of the suppliers and
activities involved with producing a satellite. This involves the major suppliers-bus,
payload, and antennas-and the minor suppliers.
Communicating and coordinating across the supply-chain is critical. Fundamentally, all the suppliers need to have a common vision and sense of direction. In effect,
the major suppliers become partners. Openly communicating goals, expectations, and
problem solving is essential. To facilitate communication, we need to seek a common
language and culture through common training and team building. The resulting program culture program can be built on the strengths of each partner.
Concurrent engineering across company lines must occur. All company sections
must share the key design rules or characteristics early in the process and maintain
them throughout the program. We must carefully define and fully understand the
_interfaces and handoffs. We should develop and use common tooling and processes.
For instance, shipping containers carrying subassemblies to final integration should
support integration activities without a tooling transfer. They should seamlessly
integrate into the factory. Finally, common metries across the supply-chain allow for
meaningful summation of data, so managers can judge the overall system health.
These metrics should center around quality, cycle time, and critical parameter
performance.

Production Floor Management
Performance and executing the production phase uses principles similar to any
production environment. In addition to supply-chain management, consistent performance takes lean manufacturing principles of production floor management, including
good processes, qualified workers, and timely information.
Short-cycle, well understood processes and overall processing is fundamental to
lean manufacturing. Simulation or other flow design tools help to determine optimum
production flows that reduce the risks of production delays. The flows and processing
should include Just In Time concepts to minimize Work In Process inventory and
improve quality and cycle time. Just In Time binges on delivering material items when
the flow needs them in a pull fashion. We don't move items until they are ready for
processing. Less hardware is in process, thereby reducing the potential for damage and
reducing overall floor space requirements.
Qualified workers that understand the processing of space hardware are still
required for satellite production. While still required, their roles and specific skills are
very different than traditional programs. Highly specialized and narrowly skilled
positions now become broader and more generalized. The design attributes resulting
from a successful multi-satellite design team will require less intensive processing.
While less difficult, the processing needs to be more repeatable. We can train or certify
workers for each repeatable operation, so the can typically monitor their own work.
We minimize quality inspections. Instead, the individual or the team is responsible for
performing each operation correctly and safely.
The capture and use of timely production data is a third production floor management challenge. Producing multiple satellites with short cycle times requires us to

r
~
1

I'

I

762

Space Manufacturing and Reliability

19.1

collect, use, and archive data differently from traditional methods. Paper, the traditional documentation medium, is too cumbersome, untimely, and not available to
multiple disciplines. COnstellations based on a large number of satellites require
volumes of data be available to multiple users. We need factory systems for work
instruction and process planning; transmittal of product data between suppliers, integrators, and users; and for factory data collection. Factory data collection includes
calibration, as-built, work-in-progress tracking, and quality data and/or information.
An added advantage is using common tools for these functions across the supply_
chain.

00

These methods apply exactly to multiple satellite constellations with communications payloads. These methods were applied to the Iridium® program, with outstanding
cost and schedule results. Constellation reliability and performance data is starting to
be collected at time of this pUblication.
Smaller constellations, non-communication payloads, and high-value missions
may use subsets of these practices. In all cases, thoughtful selection of parts and
processes and skillful application of concturent engineering practices are paramount
More detailed information regarding the application of these methods and subsequent tradeoffs will become available as more constellations complete deployment
Cturently, competitive issues restrict information flow as much data is viewed as
proprietary.

01

02

Electronics
CommunIcatIons

panel

GatewaY

-J\II1BIlI18S
GateWay Panel
Bus
crosslink
J\II1BIlI18S
EMITent
$hear Panels

Main MIssIon
AntennaS

Solar Arrays

-

03

04

05

080708091 o

11

12

13

14

15

'0

Commlncallons

space Vehicle

19.1.6 Summary

763

Designing Space Systems for ManufactorabiJity

19.1

0 0 ) I-0 IV
1
10
10
~

10

0 - "'
10 t-- 0
0

P

~

I':)

)

K)

pp p

10

10
10

) (
r

0

r
\.,

1

0p

IV
~

II'"

1\.....1

10

Station 1: Heat-pipe Bonding
.,
nI
that
• IS
• thermalIy
bonded
The heat-PIpe
. to the communication panel. This IS the 0 y process
does not occur within the integration factory.

==

Note: Stotions 2-4 operote in poral1el

The lridium® Satellite Assembly Process
The Iridium®'" Satellite Assembly Factory' comprises 15 process stations. These stations
complete specific functions. The satellites flow from station to station throughout the factory
until Station 15. At Station 15, workers pack and send the satellites to the launch-site. During
steady-state production, the total time to proceed from Station 1 to Station 15 is 24 days.
Station 0: Material Receipt
All material and subsystems are received into the satellite factory. Major systems received
into the factory include:
• Gateway antennas (4)
• Crosslink antennas, fixed (2) and moving (2)
• Panels (communications and gateway)
• Main mission antennas (3)
• Solar arrays (2)
• Satellite bus assembly
The satellite bus assembly, complete with propulsion and guidance systems, is received,
already mounted on a wheel-mounted dolly. This dolly, COllabomtively developed for use
throughout the satellite delivery process, is used for satellite assembly, shipment, and launchsite processing. The dolly also allows for access to all sides of the satellite via rotation, and can
be easily maneuvered through the factory.

• Iridium® is a registered tmdemark and service mark of Iridium 1P LLC.

s-.;::;:~

::::U=!Oving and two fixed-and the mdiatorplate are installed to
the nadir bulkhead end of the bus.
.
d ther
Station 3: Gateway Panel Assembly
' .d
tenn positioning eqmpment, cable harnesses, an 0
Gateway antennas (4), waVegul es, an
a I During this process a trunion dolly holds and
components are installed to the gateway pane .
,
rotates the panel.
Station 4: Commnnlcations Panel Assembly
.
.
Motorola supplied um'ts are installed on the .communications panel. A rotating trumon dolly
designed for the communications panel holds It
Station 5: Commnnlcations Panel Test
The completed communications panel is tested.
Station 6: Communications Equipment Subsystem (CES) Test
I Cabl
.es
.
•
th communications panel and the gateway pane.
The CES conSIsts of eqm~t on e
Is This station initially verifies the functionality
are installed to temporarily link the two pane 'perature cycles prior to being integmted in the
,
and performance of the CES hardware over tem
spacecraft.

764

Space Manufacturing and ReHabllity

19.]

19.2

Station 7: Gateway Panel Assembly Integration
th
The completed gateway panel is installed 0
the vertical position, aligned to the spa~ b e bus;ssembly. FIrSt, the panel is rotated to
harnesses are then attached.
us, an then mated to the bus. Cables and

=. m:

Station 8: CommunieatioDS Panel Assembly Integration
I"
The completed communications
rotated ISO degrees while in t h e :e IS installed onto the bus assembly. The panel is first
gback
fixture ~ then attached to the panel
for support and alignment The panel~=
A
The panel is securely fastened in place and all0;:1 SPdacecraft,h aligned, and finaIly installed.
es an arnesses are attached.
Station 9: Space Vehicle Test

~~gte~~~~unication Equip~nt Su~ (CBS) Test)
r-UVU1n:;u on the newly mtegrated comm
. .
spacecraft bus. This test verifies the CBS functi ality UDlcation panel, gateway panel. and
on
and performance.
Station 10: EMI Tent and Shear PanellnstaIIation
An EM! tent is installed over the co
"
remaining two open sides of the bus =:e~ons panel. Shear panels are then inst8ned on the
Station 11: MaJn Mission Antenna Integration
The satellite is rotated horizonta1l
th d 11
~ne at.a time. First, an attachment
~ m~ y to attach the main miss~on antennas (MMA),
lift pomts for using the lifting crane. The MMA
to t!te MMA. This fixture contains the
ered to connect one end. RF wer an'
IS e vertica1ly over the spacecraft and lowis then 10~ered un~ flat agai;!'the ~~~~~ attached. The free ~d of the MMA
and set FmaIly, this process is repeated for each of the rm:;=:~:oo~sms are adjusted

J;.:e

llI!W: f:

Station 12: Space Vehicle (Integration) Test
Full-functional testing of the MMAs communicati
testing includes seven complete hot-cold thermal CYC1~:!~Yload, and bus is conducted. The
Station 13: Solar Array Integration
Two solar array wing assemblies are integrated

MMA insta1lation. First, an attachm
. onto the spacecraft in a manner similar to
contains the lift points for using the e::::::ture IS ~unted onto th~ solar array. This fixture

~ and lOWered to connect one emf =~bl e solar array IS held verticaIIy over the
array IS then lOWered until flat against the spacecraft. ~~~hed. The free end of the solar
and set. Finally, this process is repeated for the second solar ,::::;mt mechanisms are adjusted
Station 14: Launch Confidence Test
. Flight software is loaded and verified and solar arra
"
powered down and prepared to flight read
di . Y operation IS tested. FinaIly, the vehicle
ycon tion.
-

IS

Reliability for Space Mission Planning

765

19.2 Reliability for Space Mission Planning
Herbert Hecht,I« SoHaR Incorporated
When a bulb in our desk lamp burns out, it is easily replaced. When the switch that
controls the bulb fails. the replacement is not quite as simple but still within the capabilities of most mechanically inclined teenagers and even some adults. We expect a
bigher reliability of the switch than of the lamp because it requires more effort to repair
a failure. When a spacecraft command receiver fails on orbit, it takes an extraordinarily long screwdriver to fix it. You get the general idea: the command receiver
has to be much more reliable than the light bulb or the switch on the desk lamp. This
need for very high reliability in all parts and subsystems of a spacecraft is the basis for
including a reliability program in most space projects.
Before describing the details of the reliability program. let us briefly discuss the
meaning and metrics of reliability in the context of space missions. A common definition of reliability is ''The probability that a device will function without failure over
a specified time period or amount of usage." [IEEE. 1984] Jf the phrase ''without failure" is taken to mean ''without failure of any kind" it defmes basic reliability; if it is
interpreted as ''without failure that impairs the mission" it defines mission reliability.
In spacecraft that employ extensive redundancy there can be a significant difference
between these two reliability metrics. Mission reliability is the more important
concept, and when we use ''reliability'' without a qualifier. it always means mission
reliability.
The elementary expression for the reliability of a single item. not subject to wearout
failures, is
(19-1)
where Ais the failure rate and t is the time. Here, R, is the probability that the item will
operate without failure for time t (success probability). At this point we recognize only
two outcomes: success and failure, and therefore the probability of failure, F, is given
by:
(19-2)
F=l-R
More refined and practical methods of assessing mission success will be described
later.

For a spacecraft made up of n nonredundant elements, all equally essential for
spacecraft operation, the system (or series) reliability, Rs. or success probability. is
computed as
n

Rs =

II R; = e- LA;t

(19-3)

1

Station 15: Space Vehicle Pack and Ship
The completed satellite is prepared for shi
authorizations and checkout procedures
pmen: to one of three launch-sites. Consent-to-ship
is loaded into the shipping container. Tha:;:nI! eted. e satellite;, still mounted on the dolly,
controlled and shock protected delivery to the=~:er proVIdes for an environmenta1ly

where Rj (i = L.n) is the reliability and Aj the failure rate of the individual elements.
For failure-probabilities (At) less than 0.1 or reliability greater than 0.9, the following

1'h:

• Much valuable help in the formatting of this chapter was received from Emery L Reeves of
the U.S. Air Force Academy who also contributed the material for Table 19-6.

766

r
I
I;

Space Manufacturing and ReHability

19,2

ReHabWty for Space Mission Planning

767

approximation is frequently used

e-At '" 1 - A.t
" liabili·
(19-4)
Most
re
ty computations particUlarI
.
.
.
abilities (which can be summed) rather th y ~~~ detailed desIgn, use failure probWhere a system consists of n elemen:. re a ty values (that must be multiplied)
by itself satisfy the requirements thepa 'llll~ (parall;'l:_~~ ..each. of these elements can
"
"'
11 e or reuur,"",u) reliability, Rp, is given by

in the active mode is quite smaIl. The distinction between active and quiescent failure
rates is therefore much less important for spacecraft applications.
"
When the spacecraft does not have any redundant elements, a plot of reliability vs.
mission time will be concave toward the origin, but when redundancy is provided the
initial part of the reliability plot tends to be convex to the origin. This accounts for the
shape of the mission reliability curve in Fig. 19-10.

n

1.0

Rp =1- II(l-R;)

(19-5)

I

where the reliability of the parallel elements is equal, say Ra , the above simplifies to
Rp

=1 - (1 - Ra1

(19-6)

Examples of series and parallel structures are shown in Fig. 19-9.

0.9

I

0.8
0.7

J

0.6

III

0.5

'0
04
~.

i

0.3

[J

~

02

+ Effectiveness

Mission ReDablJity

0.1

0.0

RS =1 -(1- RAl(1- RB}(1- Rd

CASE 1
SerIes Renabllity

CASE 2
Paranel ReliabIlity Full Redundancy

=

~~
~-----------..~~~----~
RS

Design life, the intended operational time on orbit (see Section 19.2.1), is an
important parameter for the reliability program. It determines the amount of consumables (control gas, etc.) that must be provided and establishes quality and test
requirements for items subject to wearout, such as bearings and batteries. The mission
reliability calculated at the design life is the mission success probability. Since this
quantity is less than 1.0, the expected life is less than the design life. The customary
measure of the expected life is the mean mission duration or MMD, given by:
MMD=fTdR

=Rc [1-(1- RA)(1- Ra>J
CASE 3

ParUaJ RedUndancy
FIg. 19-9. : :

fig. 19-10. Frequently Used ReI/abIlity Concepts. Design life Is govemed by wear-out and
expendable stores. Mean mission duration Is less than design life because faDures
can terminate a mission before end-of-life conditions are reached.

:d:r::::~ab~': ~O:~Js.
,

CASE 4
Non-Identical, Full Redundancy

Rs Is the system reliability. RA, Ra. and Rc
components, respectively.

In terrestrial applications it is customary t dis· .
cent (dormant) failure rates the latter be· °bo tingmsh between active and quiesreduction accounts for the' absence of ~g ~ ~t one-tenth of the active rates. This
energized. However the high reliability ~ c stress when a component is not
components to be derated so that the fail=mre:~ Ofdthe space e~vironment cause
pro
ty ue to electrical stresses even

(19-7)

where Trepresents a horizontal (time) line in the shaded area of Fig. 19-10 and dR is
the associated (vertical) increment in reliability. MMD is a frequently used figure of
merit for spacecraft reliability improvement programs.
Most satellites perform multiple functions (e.g., weather observation and tracking
ocean traffic), and performance of any of these functions may still be useful even
when it is degraded. Under such circumstances the success criteria are no longer obvious. Should failure be defined as the event when the spacecraft fails to furnish any
useful data, or should it be the point at which its performance deviates from any part
of the specification? This problem can be addressed by establishing multiple reliability requirements. Assume that the specified weather observations are intended to \lSe
three frequency bands but that observations on even a single band are still useful. The
success probability (SP) requirement may be formulated as shown in Table 19-2.

768

Space Manufacturing and ReHabDity

ReUabillty for Space Mission Planning

19.2
TABLE 19-2. Hypothetical Reliability Requirement for a Weather Satellite.

Condition

TABLE 19-3

Typical Steps for Achieving a Reliable System.

SP·

At least 1 band operational

0.98

At least 2 bands operational

0.92

All 3 bands operational

0.85

• Success Probability

769

Process Steps

DetaIls Found

~eep it simple (every adcfrtlonal function increases the failure

See Table 19-4

probability)

r-

dequate strength (mechanical and electrical) of ail parts,

=;~ allowanca for unusuai loads that may be im~due

Sec. 19.2.2

'de alternative means of accomplishing the m~ esse':!ai
ProVl
functions
where design for excess strength Is not suitable ( is
includes most electronics)

Sec. 19.2.3

Plan a test program to assure that the above objectives have
been achieved

Sec. 19.2.4

ct and analyze of. •
test and on-orbit failure data to guide
Co e
I s
futUre designs and mIssIon p an

Sec. 19.2.1

toenVI'ronmentai extremes or failures In related campone

During the development of the satellite it may be found that it will be difficult to
obtain a success probability for all three bands operational greater than 0.80 but that
the single band mission reliability can be raised to 0.99. If the requirements shown in
Table 19-2 are part of a contractual document it may take lengthy negotiations to agree
on the change, even though it may be technically quite acceptable. To avoid such
situations, mission effectiveness rather than reliability may be Specified. There are
several definitions of mission effectiveness [MIL-HDBK-338BJ, but all aim at a single
metric that represents reliability weighted by the operational capability level to which
the reliability is applicable. In the above example assume that the 1, 2, and 3 band
capabilities are assigned weights of 0.25, 0.35, and 0.4, respectively (it is desirable that
the weights add up to l.0). A simple mission effectiveness requirement may then be
stated as 0.25 x 0.% + 0.35 x 0.92 + 0.4 x 0.85 0.902. A similar calculation shows
that raising the single band reliability to 0.99 will not compensate for reducing the
3 band reliability to 0.80, but that this reduction could be tolerated if the 2 band reliability is raised to 0.95 at the same time. Where there is·a sound technical basis for
specifying mission effectiveness it will generally reduce both cost and development
time compared to specifying multiple reliability values. As indicated in Fig. 19-10, the
effectiveness curve will lie above the reliability curve when the latter is constructed
for an "all· up" satellite.

t - II

.

TABLE 19-4

Simple

=

19.2.1 Design for Reliability

Relationship Between Falfure Rate and Complexity.

System

Type

Fall Rate'

Type

Fall Rate'

Hardwired

0.034

Programmable

0.190

Stabilization

Gravity
Spin

0.038·
0.216

3-axis active

0.610

Thermal

Passive

0.084

Active

0.320

Telemetry

• per orbit-year

. Alternative Assignments of Responsibility

TABLE 19-5

Alternative

The process for designing a reliable system is shown in Table 19-3. Evidence that
simplicity makes for reliability can be seen in Table 19-4, which is excerpted from an
earlier publication by the author of this section [Hecht and Hecht, 1985]. Complex
functions had higher failure rates. In each case shown in the last columns of the table,
there were probably compelling reasons for using the more complex implementation,
but the reliability consequences of these decisions must also be recognized.
To make sure that the process leading to a reliable system is being carried out as
intended, there must be an explicit assignment of responsibility for its implementation.
Several alternatives for the assignment are listed in Table 19-5 in order of increasing
direct cost For very small satellites the low cost advantage of (A) or (B) will usually
outweigh the benefits of the last two alternatives. When subsystems get more numerous and larger, alternatives (C) and (0) may result in overall savings, in spite of their
higher immediate cost.
The activities liSted below are suitable for alternatives (B) or (C). Where alternative
(A) is adopted, at least a Reliability Program Plan should be prepared and a Failure
Reporting System should be established. Alternative (0) implies that the program will
be managed by reliability specialists who will generate their own process requirements.

Complex

Benefits

(A) Designers responsible for No additionai staff
reliability
Familiarity with items

Disadvantages
Difficult to achieve uniformity; aiso
limitations In (8)

Clear responsibility

(8) Designers responsible
All of the above plus
with policy guidance from some uniformity
management

No responsibility for subsystem
interactions, opportunity for analytic
redundancy may be overlooked, little
awareness of reliability tools

(C) Designers responsible
with guidance from
reliability organization

Requires dedicated reDabiJity function,
possible confusion over responsibDity

Uniform proceduras,
above cflSBdvantages
largely overcome

(D) Responsibl7ity in reliabl7ity Responsibility clearly
organization
defined, Interactions
likely to be Identified

R lillbiJity Program Plan

e

Lower motivation for designers,
expense of reJlabDity organization.

~o~ ~e

" .
adds little to the cost and is recommended even
A reliabllzty program plan
.ftes liability objectives, assigns responslbihty
~t Spec1miles
t re for evaluating the achievements. It also
smallest
spacecraft
program.
for
achieving
them, and
establishes
ODes

770

Space Manufactnring and ReJiability

serves as an agreement with other spacecraft functions regarding their responsibilities
in support of reliability. The most significant interfaces usually are with quality assur.
ance, test, configuration management. and thermal control.
Failure Modes Analysis
Failure Modes, Effects, and Criticality Analysis (FMECA) can provide valuable

insights into how design decisions affect reliability. Typical benefits are
• Exposing single point failme modes in a subsystem assumed to be redundant
• Identifying opportunities for functional redundancy (see Sec. 19.2.3)
• Permitting components to assume a safe mode in the absence of required sig.
nals or power
Failme modes are usually recorded at the part level, e.g., for a capacitor the failure
modes are open and short (sometimes a change in capacitance may also be recorded).
Failure effects are assessed at the part level and also at higher levels such as assembly
and major component or subsystem. The failme effect of a shorted capacitor may be a
bias shift on a transistor (part level) which in turn cuts off the output of a demodulator
(assembly level) and causes loss of voice communications (subsystem level). In addi·
tion, the FMECA forms usually contain fields for the method of detection and the
means of failure alleviation. In our example, the detection may be by an output moni·
tor included in the demodulator, and the failure alleviation may be use of an alternate
voice channel.
A probability is associated with each failure mode, and the probabilities of all failme modes that cause a given effect are added in a summary section of the FMECA.
Loss of modulator output cited in the example may be caused by several failure modes
of the demodulator components, and loss of the voice channel may be caused by fail·
ure modes other than those in the demodulator. Although there may be considerable
error in the estimate of a given failure mode, these tend to be evened out when arriving
at estimates of failure effects at the subsystem and higher levels.
In digital microcircuits it is usually not possible to conduct FMECA at the level of
primitive elements (gates or transistors) because there are too many of them and
because causes of failure may affect multiple elements (e.g., voids in the oxide layer).
The FMECA may then be conducted at the function level, where functions are timers,
counters, and shift registers. Failure modes at the function level are generally not as
well known as those at the part level, and a single cause of failure may affect multiple
functions. In assessing the effects of failure at the higher level it may therefore be
advisable to be conservative.
Sneak circuit analysis is usually considered a part of FMECA. This analysis
establishes that explosive or other one-shot devices will not be accidentally actuated,
and that they will always be actuated when intended. A good guide to FMECA is
MIL-STD-1629.
Failure Reporting
Failure Reporting and Corrective Action (FRACAS) is a key element in any reli·

ability program because:
a. It informs concerned parties that a failure has been observed

i
I,

ReUabDity for Space MIssion PlaDning

19.2

b. It furnishes a record through which trends and correlations can be evaluated
at a future time (an example of a trend is that the probability of failme in-

771

creases after x hours of use; an example of a cmrelation is that part y fails
during a particular step in the test sequence).
cted failure rates and is the basis for
'ts reassessment 0 f the predi
..
c. It pernn
odifi ti' ns of the fault avoidance or fault tolerance proVISIonS.
consequentm
ca 0
.
rdin the operating time of all units in service; usually by
Uses b and c req~ reco ma!tained for each part number, with separate records for
means o~ an operating log . e action is ically also recorded on the failure ~g
each se.;:.~ ~U:~=~tion man~ement in that it ~tabIishes atRwbat ~mt
form. 11~ a
h been returned to operational status. eportmg on
failed component or ::c~=
investigation of the effectiveness o~ the rep~
the same form .also cti frequently involves two steps: in the fust. a failed part IS
action. Corrective a on
. . th second step addresses the root cause,
replaced by a good one of the ~e ~gn, e f this art. The resUlts of retest are
b tightening limits for the mcommg test 0
P
e.g., y
•
ti report.
. luded in the corrective ac on
. tified:
tn\o establish a FRACAS the following must be Iden

fu:re

a

• Scope of the activities (e.g., system test, field test. normal usage)
• Responsibility for cost and for report initiation
. (
lectronic each incident or
• Method and frequency of reporting e.g., paper or e
,
. . '
by time interval)
.
f failures and corrective actions IS not standardized.
The format used for reporting 0 •
•
The following are the most essential data:
.
1. Incident identification (e. g., report senal number)
2 Date time and loCale of the incident
Part ~o., name of the failed component. and its serial n~.
4 Higher level part or system identifiers (subsystem or map compon~t) .
S' Lower level part or system identifiers (usually available only after ~agnoS1s)
. Ope'
. progress and environmental conditions when failme was
6.
rabon 1D
detected
7. Immediate and higher level effects of failme
.'
.
8 Names of individuals responsible for detection, verification and analysIS
'.
. f!--...A:ate contributory and root causes of the failure
9. DiagnosIS 0 uww;;u> t
10. Dates and nature of repair and results of retest.

3:

Low Cost Methods of ReliDbility Assess":ent.
handbook) or estimation
Reliability ~ctio~ (usually byn:g ~a:c:):routinely required for maj?r
(based on eXperIence WIth the c~po.
pop fi
r b'lity estinIation are shown 1D
satellite programs. Representative faIlure rates or re la 1
Table 19-6.
bstracted from MIL-HDBK-217F and can be used for
Lo
liability parts such as
These failure rates are a
.,
b ed n parts type and count. wer re
h higher (between 12 and 333 tiDIes).
reliability predictions ~ 0
commercial parts have faIlure rates thtedataref::":r:'uc in 1()9 hours they con:espond to A
Values shown in the table are expec
iWures
,
in Eq. (19-1).

~
Space Manufacturing and ReJiability

772

19.2

TABLE 19-6. Representative Piece Part FaIlure Rates for High Reliability Parts. These
failure rates are. abstracted from MIL-HDBK-217F and can be used for renabRity
predictions based on parts type and count Lower reliability parts such as commer_
cial parts have failure rates between 12 and 333 times these failure rates. Va/ues
are falJures In 1()9 hours, they correspond to A in Eq. (19-1).
Part Type

Bipolar GatelLogic Array Dig

Space
flight

Launch

0.9-19

17-300

Min 1-100 gates; Max 60,000 gates
Min 8 bits; Max 32 bits

7-27

60-215

MOS Microprocessor

12-47

70-250

MOS Memory SRAM

2-11

24-75

Mln16K;Max1 M

2-8

30-75

Min 16K; Max 1 M

1.3

170

Diodes General
Transistors General

0.05

5

TransIstors RF Power

165

900

Resistors

0.01

1

Capacitors

0.1

10

Relays

40

6,000

MISSION FAILURE

Applicability

Bipolar Microprocessor

Bipolar SRAM

773

ReHability for Space Mission Planning

Min 8 bits; Max 32 bits
EXECUTION
STOPPED

FAULTY ANTENNA
ORIENTATION

SOLAR PANE\.
NOT DEPLOYED

Compositionlfilm

fig. 19-11. Fault Tree. Fault trees show which functions may be disabled due to a single failure.

Parts count reliability estimation may be used for comparison of design altematives, when test or on-orbit incidents indicate insufficient reliability, or when a more
expensive payload is to be incorporated (which increases the cost of failure).

Software Consillerations
Spacecraft operations are becoming increasingly dependent on software, in. the
spacecraft and in the ground segment There have been spectacular launch and on orbit
failures due to software faults, but many more missions have been saved by software
(used for work-around) than have been lost due to it Thus the way to more effective
space missions may not so much lie in minimizing software as in making appropriate
use of it. It should also be mentioned that most software used in spacecraft is actually
firmware (programs furnished as read-only-memory chips).
Reliability assessment of software is not a precise science. The most widely accepted techniques depend on test (very expensive if high levels of reliability are
required) or on independent verification and validation (even more expensive and less
likely to yield a quantitative assessment). When software is simple and well structured
its reliability is usually high and the cost of evaluation is low.
Cost effective software reliability assessment starts with an examination of the
ways in which software can impact the mission. A convenient format for this is a fault
tree, as shown in Fig. 19-11.
In this example, the software failures that are most likely to lead to mission failure
are:
1. Complete halting of execution, e. g., due to being in an infinite loop or being
directed to an incorrect memory location.
2. Faulty antenna orientation due to an antenna drive failure or faulty attitude
determination
3. Failure to deploy the solar array.

Double failures are required to halt execution of programs and deployment ?f the
solar array, because both of these have backup mechanisms. Faulty an~a onen~­
lion can be caused in two ways, and there is currently no b~<:ku~ pro~on ~or ~
hazard Once this deficiency is recognized, alternatives for IDltigation will be mvestiated. Re-orienting the spacecraft by ground command may ~. ~ worst case ~c~,
g .ded that ground commands will be received regardless of lDltial antenna p?SltiOn.
pro;edundancy management is also frequently a very critical software function handled by the spacecraft computer.
high
rity
A study of the space shuttle avionics softw~ showed that causes of
~ve of
failures were overwhelmingly assOCiated WIth rare events, such as handlin~
exception conditions, management of hardware failures, and respon~ to
.~
incorrect crew commands [Hecht and Crane, 1994]. These data, as we as 0 ers C1
in the reference, indicate. that testin.g of spacecraft software shftw°uld ~:our::tra) ~;~
unusual events in the enVllOnment (mcluding hardware and so are
rectly handled.

':US

!

19.2.2 Design for Fault Avoidance
Fault avoidance is most effective when there are only a very small n~ber ?f
significant failure modes. Common fault. avoidance techniques are s own m
Table 19-7, and application guidance is proVIded below.
Process Control
.
Control of the manufacturing process can only be exerci~ .where parts are specifically manufactured for the spacecraft. In most cases this mclud~ th~
propulsion components, and segments of the environmental conditi~D1Dg sys .
Control over the assembly process can usually be exercised for the entire spacecraft.

struC:'

-------~~~~~~~~~~~

~

Space Manufactu.ring and Reliability

774

19.2

19.2

Reliability for Space Mission Planning

775

i
TABLE 19-7. Representative Methods for Fault Avoidance.
t:echnlque

Most Suitable for

Umltatlons

Process Control

Current deficiencies exist

User must be able to influence process

Design Margins, etc.

Known failure risk

Adds weight and cost

Coding Techniques

Memory upset

DigitSi components only

Part Selection
and Screening

Modest improvement
required

Critical measurements must be known

and this is where major emph~is for fault avoidance through tighter
should be placed.
process control
A good starting point for investigating the feasibility and effectiveness of tighter
process ~ntrols for fault avoidance is to investigate past failures in test and operati
and. partic~arly f~ ne-:v components or processes, difficulties that have been ex ~
e.nced .during engmeenng evaluations. These constitute the "current deficien~
listed m .Tabl~ 19-?, and for each the underlying cause of failure must be identified.
Where dispersIOns m material or process characteristics are implicated. tighter
control can be expected to make a significant contribution to f~t avoidance. process

Design Margins, Derating and Environmental Protection
failDesign m~ and demting accomplish the same goal: prevention of component
~ due t~ !rlgher than expected external stresses or other deviations from the
nominal conditions. The term design margin is mostly used in structure and thermal
subsystems and means that a component is designed to carry more than the ex ted
load !,ropel~ ~rgins.in propulsi~n systems are an equivalent concept. ~
term
der~g 1~ pnmanly applied to electrical and electronic components and involves the
spe~fic~tion of a component that carries a higher mting than is needed f,
th
application.
or e
. . ~ reliability ~prove~t by these pmctices is most significant if a part is
Y used near Its desllpl strength ~r electrical mting. As an example (from
-HDBK-217F), the predicted base failure mte for a fixed film resistor at 40° C and
~ at 0.9 ~f ?lted power is 0.0022 x 10-6lhour. Selecting a higher mted resistor, for
:hi~ the dISSIpated power co~titutes only 0.3 of mted power reduces this to 0.0011
1 1hour. !Jut further reductions are hard to achieve. A resistor for which the dissipated power IS 0.1 of the mting still has a failure mte 0.0009 x 10-6lhour. Demted parts
not only cost .more, but are frequently larger and heavier than the ones that they
reI?lace. Demtlng only reduces the failure probability with respect to the stress that is
~mg ~mted In the example of the fixed film resistor, demting reduces the probabilIty of failure due to power surges but it does not offer any protection against failures
due to ~ead breakage or corroded connections.
E?~'ronmental protection can take the form of shock mounting cooling or h tin
proVlSI?~, and .shiel~g against mdiation effects, Where demtin~ reduces the
probability by. mcreasmg ~e strength of the components, environmental protection
reduces the f~ure probability by reducing the stress levels. In many cases environmental protection. adds considemble weight, and this, mther than cost, hmits the
amount of protection that can be provided.

=

:u!

Coding Techniques
Coding provides robustness by permitting continued opemtion in the presence of a
defined spectrum of errors, primarily in memory and data transmission. Coding techniques are also available for detection or tolemtion of errors in arithmetic processors
but are seldom used in this capacity in spacecraft computers.
The important coding techniques are error detecting code and error correcting
code. The former isintended primarily for fault isolation (i. e., preventing an incorrect
result from being used in subsequent opemtions). The latter is a fault tolerance mechanism that corrects a class of errors and permits operations to continue normally. All
codes require the addition of check bits to the bit pattern that represents the basic
information. If there is agreement between the check and information bits, the data is
accepted. If there is no agreement, the data is rejected (for error detecting code) or
corrected (for error correcting code).
The cost effectiveness of error correcting codes is shown in the following hypothetical example for a commercial earth observation satellite. The payload computer's 4
megabit dynamic random access memory has a mass of 400 gr. This memory (which
does not incorpomte error correction or detection) is expected to sustain two ''upsets"
per orbit-year. Upon detection of an upset by ground monitoring, the memory is
reloaded. an opemtion that typically loses data from two orbits. The expected mission
income is $1,000 per orbit. In the absence of error correction, the cost of memory
upsets will therefore be $4,000 per year. The extra memory and coding/decoding chips
will add 100 gr. to the mass of the memory and will cost $1,000. The cost/mass ratio
for this satellite is $5,000 per kg, and thus the extra 100 gr will be equivalent to $500.
In this example the cost of the error correction will be paid for in less than one-half
orbit-year. As discussed in Sec. 8.1, the number of upsets to be expected depends on
the size and type of memory, the orbit, and the amount of shielding provided by the
spacecraft structure and the memory enclosure. In most cases coding is found to be
very cost effective.
Port Selection and Screening
Screening (selection of parts by test) is a process that eliminates units that have a
higher likelihood of failing in service than the other units in the lot [Chan,I994].
Whereas demting reduces the probability of failure by moving the avemge strength of
the components higher, screening reduces the probability of failure by rejecting the
lower tail of the distribution as shown in Fig. 19-12. A typical screening procedure for
semiconductors is to measure the leakage current at elevated tempemture.
The cost of screening is made up of two elements: the cost of the rejected product,
and the cost of test. The cost effectiveness is high (1) for parts with an initially high
failure mte, (2) for modest reliability improvements (generally those in which not
more than 20% of the product is rejected), and (3) where the cost of test is small
compared to the unit cost of the product under test (not over 10%)
Screening does not involve an increase in the size of the components and it is therefore preferred to demting for bulky or heavy parts. Screening is not very effective for
reducing the failure probability in a mode for which components have been demted
because the failure probability due to external stresses in that mode is already very
low. Screening can be applied to assemblies, e.g., by subjecting them to combined
tempe~ and vibmtion environments and is thus more versatile than demting.
Screening at the assembly level is also likely to result in a lower mtio of test cost to
product cost and thus produces a higher figure of merit.

776

Space Manufacturing and Reliability
ReUabllity for Space Mission Planning

777

for space applications, costs will be reduced if the process can be improved so that
only a small portion of the product will be rejected in screening.
19.2.3 Fault Tolerance
Fault tolerance protects against a wider spectrum of failure modes than fault avoidance. In most cases it also requires much more resources. A summary of the suitability
and limitations of representative fault tolerance techniques is shown in Table 19-8.
TABLE 19-8. Representative Fault Tolerance TechnIques.
TechnIque

Part Strength
(Any DesIrable Attribute)
Fig. 19-12.

Attribute Controfby ScreenIng. Screening rejectS Parts likely to faD in service.

~tC:7g is real!y a crutch that pennits the use ofproducts that do not, as delivered,
.

o. the reqwrements of an given application. A more desirable reliability
measure IS to tighten the control of the process so that it can be lied
outliers that must be screened out. This is not onl
. re . on not to produce the

:i~:,i~~~~t practical consequences as shownYb~~~~:~~=~~b~:
__ ConlroUed
~

Population

.-- Screened

.--

Populallon

Part Strength
(Any DeslJabIe AttrIbute)

L

Fig. 19-13. Attribute Control by Process Contr I
0 • In a controUed population fewer parts are
near tit
e acceptance limit than in a screened population.

Both the screened population and the controlled
ul·
criteria in that no parts fall below the lower limit, den ~ a~o.n:eet the acceptance
; th as m e figure. However,
in the screened population a much larger fracti
lower limit than in the controlled populati En0Tf 0
e total population is near the
dispersion of the attributes, and therefore
vtrOnmental effec~ and aging cause a
population to fall below the lower limit th . cause a larger fraCtion of the screened
can be compensated for by selecting an ini~alma: control!~ popul.ati~n. This effect
lowest value that can be tolerated in
. Wh ptan~ limit that IS higher than the
servIce.
ere articles are procured specifically

0;m

Protection AgaInst

Same Design Redundancy RandOm failures

UmJtaUons
High production cost, weight

~ ()iverse Design Redundancy Random and design failures Same, plus design and logistic cost
k-out-of-n Redundancy

Random failures

Functional Redundancy

Random and design failures Diverse methods to accomplish a
function must be available

Temporal Redundancy

Transient, Intermittent
failures

Applicable only where multiple
copies of an article are present

TIme required for recovery

By scope of redundancy, we mean the size and importance of the entity that is being
made redundant. Paralleling two relay contacts is a redundancy provision of very small
scope, and dual telemetry systems represent redundancy of large scope. In Fig. 19-14
the single system line shows the reliability of a single element with MTBF of one time
unit. The system redundancy curve shows the resulting reliability if two of these elements are operated in paralleL The partitioned redundancy curve refers to the original
(single) system being divided into quarters, and then each quarter made redundant.
The redundant and the quarter-partitioned curve involve (at least superficially) the
same resources (in each case twice those of the single system), and yet the quarter
configuration has a pronounced reliability advantage, particularly at the longer time
intervals. It would therefore seem that redundancy of small scope is to be preferred
over that of large scope.
In practice, the switching or voting provisions that are required for each partition
can add considerably to the cost of the implementation, and since they are not likely
to be 100% reliable they may also reduce the reliability benefits. System test can also
be adversely impacted by redundancy of small scope. The system redundancy (middle
curve in the figure) requires only two tests. The quarter redundancy requires 16 tests
if all combinations are to be covered. Selecting the scope of redundancy must consider
the meaDs of failure detection, the ease of output switching or combining, the reliability gains that can be achieved, and the cost of implementation and test.
Same Design Redundtuu:y
Same design redundancy involves installation of two or more identical components
together with switching to make one of them active. In a few instances, particularly for
power supplies, the outputs can be combined so that switching is not necessary. Voting
can also be used for combining outputs of redundant units but this carries a high cost
because at least three identical units have to be installed to make it practicable. Same
design redundancy offers very high protection against random failures, and the

778

Space Manufacturing and ReBability

Reliability for Space Mission Planning

dancy is economical primarily where the back-up unit comes from a previous satellite
design, or where there is experience with it from another source. Where there is concern about the design integrity of a primary component. diverse design redundancy
may have to be employed regardless of cost.

0.8 r-'1i:--t-.........:~-+--;~~--+---I

0.6

~

:B

=i
a:

D.4

I

!i

0.2

~,~~~~~__L-~~__~~
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Time (MuIUples of MTBF)

771)

1.6

Rg.19-14. Effect o! PartlUo?~ng on ReIIabDIty. t Is the time from the start of the miss/on

.
the missIOn rellabrlity or the probability that at least essential rrrlssion elemenb:
)
survive (see Sec. 19.2.1), Nis the number of IndMduai blocks (4 in th fI
Als the failure rate of an IndMduai block. For the elementaJy dlstrlbutlo e gure , and
lde
here As1/MTBF. wh
MTBFlsthe
nseons red
th '
,ere
mean time betwoen fatlure for each block. For
e system as a whole, Rs = exp (-Ast>, where As Is 1IMTBF for the whole system.

rn:nefits do not depend on knowledge of failure modes. It is not very effecti

.

~~ due to design deficie?Cies: if.one component fails due to insufficien;~~=

ess, the redundant one IS very likely to fail soon thereafter Because f th bigh
cost.
. us ed only sparingly in low cost .satellites 0 e
Thsame design redundancy IS
e cost of same design redundancy can sometimes be red ed b .
.
k-out-of-n replacement, in which a pool of spares can be assigne:~
employmg
of the IJO?I of active ~ts. An.example is bulk memory (for data stora e)a~~~:~
ally COnsiSts of multiple phYSically identical modules Providing
g
modules on the
data b '
.
one or more spare
h
same
us permits replacement of anyone failed module The same
sClectrie~e can be used for multi-cell batteries, solar panels, and other elem~nts of the
e
c power supply.

rJ

Diverse Design Redundancy

Installation of two or more components of different design (called .1~'e
.1_,
red,,,,,J--.) to furnish t h .
WI' rse ueSign
":'H<UM":J
e same service has two advantages: it offers high
tecti
ag~t f~ur:,du! to. design deficiencies, and it can offer lower cost if th~ack-~;
: .IS a
~. at. With lowe! acc~y and functionality, but still adequate for the
b~W:f~~:~~:~~ The ~~~ationfix0f diverse units usually adds to logistic cost
SpeCI IcatJons, tures, and spare parts. This form of redun-

Functional and Temporal Redundancy
Functional redundancy (sometimes called analytic redundancy) involves furnishing a service by diverse means. An example is the determination of attitude rate from
a rate gyro assembly (direct), and from observation of celestial bodies (indirect). It is
particularly advantageous when the alternate is already installed for another service,
e.g., if a star sensor is provided for navigation. In these cases the only cost incurred is
for the switching provisions and for data conversion. Both of these can frequently be
achieved in an existing onboard computer, thus further minimizing the cost.
Functional redundancy can also take the form of a ground back-up for functions
preferably performed autonomously, e.g., navigation, thermal control, or furnishing
commands for sensor operation. In the communication subsystem there are frequently
omni-directional and directional antenna systems. For some satellite missions these
may also be considered a form of functional redundancy.
The chief benefits of analytic redundancy are: (1) it avoids the cost and weight
penalties of physical redundancy, and (2) it is inherently diverse, thus providing
protection against design faults. The major limitation is that the back-up provisions
usually entail lower performance.
Temporal redundancy involves repetition of an unsuccessful operation. A common
example is a retry after a failure within the computing process. The same technique is
applicable to acquisition of a star, firing of a pyrotechnic device, or communication
with the ground. This is obviously a low cost technique. It is most effective when the
design incorporates an analysis of the optimum retry interval and of changes that may
improve the success oflater operations, e.g., switching a power supply, reducing loads
on the power supply, or re-orientation of the satellite. The most important step is to
plan ahead for retry of operations and to incorporate "hooks" that pennit automatic or
ground-initiated retry.
11).2.4 Test Techniques

The least expensive reliability testis one that is not run at all as a reliability test. but
rather as a part of a qualification test. lot acceptance test for purchased parts, or as an
acceptance test on the spacecraft as a whole or on a major subsystem. To use these .
activities for reliability assessment may require some additional instrumentation and
sometimes an extension of the test time, but these are very small resource expenditw'es
compared to those required for even a modest separately run reliability test.
Other alternatives to obtaining reliability data by test are:
• Using test data obtained by others (including vendors) on the same component
• Using test or experience data on similar components
• Stress-strength analysis (particularly for mechanical components)
• Reliability prediction by MU..-HDBK-217 or similar sources
One of the greatest problems with reliability tests is that the results are usually
obtained after many months or even years of test. Once it has been decided that a
reliability test is necessary, a suitable scope and test environment must be selected.

r
I

I

'"
I
!

I
I
~

Space Manufacturing and ReHability

780

19.2

The scope designates the assembly level; parts and circuit boards usuaIl bein d .
while subsystem and system level tests represent larg; scesopelg_
sm scope tests are:
- '

~~an~gsesmallOfscopeall'

·

~

!:~cost and small size of individual test articles permit testing of multiple

• Inputs and outputs are easily accessible
: The test environment can be tailored to the requirements of the unit under test
The test can be conducted early because it does not require integration.
Advantages oflarge scope tests are:
• Interactions between components can be observed
• Test results are easily translated to effects on the mission.
.
The in
testa qw'escent
environment can
testing
. be'
qUiescent (room ambIent)
or stressed. Advantages of
envIronment are:
• Lo~ cost (no or only simple environmental chambers required)
• Articles under test are easily accessible
• No induction of failures due to unusually high stress
Advantages of a stressed environment are:
• Increased probability of failure (less test time required)
• Can identify environmental vulnefability of the unit under test.
The19-9.
attributes of the approaches Iead t0 the test recolDJDendations shown in
Table
TABLE 19-9. Typical Uses of Reliability Testing.

Small Scope
Quiescent
EnvironmBflt

Sultabnlty test
Critical components-failure inducing stress unknown

SIressed

Critical components-fallure inducing stress known

Large Scope

High risk
subsystems

an~~l=~~:=~~ large scope and in a stressed environment is very expensive

~:::Wles is employed.

;':::eans th~t~~C:~ ~}~=tr==:: ~esting

The time required fo

liabili

by
Y recorded (as contrasted with the commonly used assIfail proced IS numerbedalta. the distribution of parameters can be plotted, !d the probabiliurety drop-m
owdescribed·
an acceptance
to the one
th criterion
Screenincan be assessed
.
.Th
.e general technique is similar
~ Techniques section. For reliability assessment
the parameter di tribm • e
th:C::f:~:.terest. whereas in screening the attributes of
individual units

I

pm~eseg

~fFro

a:.e

The small component populations that are typical f

the use of conventional reliabili de
.
0 space procurements preclude
requirement, such as reliability~f o~~~=~~nOOOmethhods.
a ~odest subsystem
,ours E(ven
approxImately
2 years),
.
-,

I.

19.2

ReHabmty for Space Mission Planning

781

corresponds to an MTBF of _over 330,000 hours and will require over 1 million
component-hours of test to arrive at a statistically meaningful assessment by conventional methods. Yet, experimental verification of the claimed reliability of a
component or subsystem is frequently desirable and sometimes fequired. The following paragraphs explore low cost methods of accomplishing this.
The major causes of failures are workmanship and design. The first of these can be
controlled by quality assurance. Design failures occur primarily because the strength
of a component is not adequate for the environment in which it is used, or because the
manufacturing process permits too much variability in component characteristics. This
is most easily seen in mechanical spacecraft components where reliability depends on
(a) the margin between the nominal (mean) strength of the component and the
maximum service load and (b) the variability of strength about the mean in the
delivered product. Since test can characterize the strength of mechanical components
fairly easily, strength-load margins (design margins) have always played a major role
in their reliability assessment. For electrical and electronic components the same relationship holds in principle, but it is usually much harder to define a single failure
inducing stress or load. Nevertheless, test data can give valuable insights into potential
reliability problems. Important requirements are (a) recording of test results in numerical form (not passlfail), and (b) statistical evaluation of the probability of failure
derived from the numerical test results, e.g. by applying the 60" criterion (the mean
value of a parameter is at least six standard deviations above the specified minimum
or below the specified maximum) [Harry, 1997]. The tests from which the required
data are obtained need not be specific reliability tests. Typically they are the qualification test and acceptance tests.

References
Chan, H. Anthony. 1994. "A Formulation of Product Reliability Through Environmental Stress Testing and Screening." Journal of the Institute of Environmental
Science, MarchlAprill994, pp. 50-56.
Defense Systems Management College. 1986. Integrated Logistics Support Guide (I st
Edition). Fort Belvoir, VA: Department of Defense.
_ . 1986. Systems Engineering Management Guide (2nd Edition). Fort Belvoir,
V A: Department of Defense.
General Accounting Office (GAO). March 1989. "Space Operations-NASA Efforts
to Develop and Deploy Advanced Spacecraft Computers." GAo/IMTEC-89-17.

Harry, M. 1997. The Nature of Six Sigma Quality. Schaumburg, illinois: Motorola
University Press.
Harry, M. and L. Lawson. 1997. Six Sigma Producibility Analysis and Process Characterization. Schaumburg, lliinois: Motorola University Press.
Hecht, H. 1967. "Economics of Reliability Improvement for Space Launch Vehicles,"
Air Force Report No. SAMSO-TR-68-340.
_ _• 1970. "Interpretation of Test Data by Design Margin Techniques," in Annals

of the Assurance Sciences, 9th Reliability and Maintainability Conference.
--.1973. ''Figure of Merit for Fault-Tolerant Space Computers.;' IEEE Transactions on Computers, C-22, No.3: 246-251.

~:~:
..

782

Space Manufacturing and ReUabillty

11

19.2

Hecht, H. and P. Crane. 1994. "Rare Conditions and Their Effect on Software
Failures." Proceedings of the 1994 Reliability and Maintainability SymposilOn,
January, pp. 334-337.

Cbapter20

Hecht, H. and M. Hecht. 1985. ''Reliability Prediction for Spacecraft," RADC Repon
RADC-TR-85-229. Rome Air Development Center, NY: Department of Defense.

Cost Modeling

IEEE. 1984. IEEE Standard Dictionary of Electrical and Electronics Terms. New
York: Wiley Interscience.

Henry Apgar, MeR Intemotional, I'!c.
David Bearden, The Aerospace Corporation
Robert Wong, TRW, Inc.

Kececioglu, D. and D. Cormier. 1964. "Designing a Specified Reliability Directly into
a Component," in Proceedings of the Third Annual Aerospace Reliability and
Maintainability Conference, Society of Aerospace Engineers.
Uoyd, D.K. and M. Lipow. 1977. Reliability: Management Methods and Mathematics
(2nd edition). Published by the authors.

20.1 Introduction to Cost Analysis
.
Elements ofAnalysis; Cost Estimating Methods;

MIL-HDBK-338B. 1998. Electronic Reliability Design, Section 10, Systems Reliability Engineering. Department of Defense.

Cost Model Development Process; Types of DoUars
20.2 The Parametric Cost Estimation Process

MIL-SID-1629.1980. Military Standard, Procedures for PeT/orming a Failure Mode
Effects and Criticality Analysis (FMECA) (rev. A). November. Department of
Defense.

FireSot Cost Element
20.3 Cost Estimating Relationships

.
Space Segment Costs; Software Costs; Ground
Segment and Operations Costs; Launch Costs

MIL-HDBK-217F. 1991. Military Handbook. Reliability Prediction of Electronic
Equipment (rev. F). (withdrawn as a DoD document)

. A_~J...· 71'
Cost Modeling Errors and Cost-Risk n"''''iSJS; une
Spreading of Costs; Rough Order-of-Magnitude Cost
Estimates; Learning Curve
20.5 FueSat Example

20.4 OtherTopics

Montgomery, D.C. 1996. Introduction to Statistical QUQlity Control (3rd edition).
New York: John Wiley & Sons.
NASA and the Department of Defense. 1986. National Space Transportation and

Support Study.

NASA Johnson Spaceflight Center (JSC). 1989. Proceedings ofthe Satellite Services

Workshop Number Four.

Olivieri, J.M. 1997. "Commercial Satellite Manufacturing: Prerequisites for Success."
UnpUblished Master's degree thesis, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona.
Shunk, D.L. 1992. Integrated Process Design and Development. Homewood, Illinois:
Business One Irwin.
Stoney, W.E. 1989. The Polar Platform and the SSS. Paper presented at. the 20th
Satellite Services System Working Group Meeting, 30-31 March.
Trivedi, Kishor S. 1982. Probability & Statistics with Reliability Queuing and
Computer Science Applications. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
- - - . 1984. "Reliability Evaluation for Fault-Tolerant Systems," in Mathematical
Computer PeT/ormance and Reliability, G. Iazeolla, P J. Courtos and A. Hordijk.
eds. The Netherlands: Elsevier Science Publishers V.V.
Wade, D1. and C.S. Welch. 19%. "Spacecraft Manufacturing Implications for
Volume Production Satellites." Paper No. IAF-96-U.4.08, presented at the 47th
International Astronautical Congress, Beijing, China.

gineering arameter that varies with pbysical parameters,
Cost is an en
eJ methods. A system's cost depends on its size, comdesi life schedule, and other cbaracteristics. It's
tecbnology, and ~.
piexity, tec~olor~ : : : : i n e t h ' :
reducing risk, management style, docuand
controls, as well as
size of
also
men ~ or anizatio~. Analyzing and predicting program cost 1S becommg
perro . g
rtan often critical, to determining whether a program
..At
po ns!.s responding to budget reductions, and contractors, realizing
the same time, spo
,
dri th d '
ually leads to a more
that allowing technical performance alone to ve e es1gn us
akin ·t ore
expensive system, are sys~maticaUy redefining the business of space, m
g1 m

~c:~ments

mcreaslD~y

n:

fa:

~ject-management

~e
~e
~

.
.
In traditi al perfordifficult to accurately predict cost.
Th
trends dictate a changing role for cost estimation.
. on ,
ese
odelin was primarily used to validate contractor
~!!!7~tiOn: an independent estimate of probable cost.
mance-?nly drive~
g ~'O~
fulfillin
h
Often a space system
cost estimates or gtve

pr:,

;~~:~:~~tync:S~~~:~~~~~:~hat
the :u:! ;:~ed. H~we~er, ~~~~
tasks of design-to-cost and cost as an indepe,IUf:'..
••
1
glVmg
way to the more complex
.
This tails a
riabl
h re rformance is maximized subject to cost constramts.
en
:ore ;:;~~e :d interactive role for the cost estimator with involvement from the
•

IS

Womack, J.p.. D.T. Jones, and D. Roos. 1990. The Machine That Changed the World.
New York: Macmillan Publishing Company.
783

;:
j

Cost Modeling

784

I

I

i

20.1

beginning of the process so that we may identify cost-effective solutions that meet a
program's requirements. We can no longer just apply a general-purpose cost model to
decide which programs to fund. Instead, we must develop a deeper understanding of
cost-modeling methods, programmatic factors, and technological risks. As fiscal pres_
sures continue to drive space budgets lower, cost estimates are being used at virtuaIIy
all stages of space system procurement. Early in conceptual design, cost estimates help
us assess whether development will succeed and identify key design decisions that will
influence future costs. Project costs are monitored throughout the development cycle,
and if they move much above budgeted amounts, we often must rescope or even cancel
the program. Cost models must be flexible enough to evolve, from preliminary design
to much later in the integration and test process, when we're deciding how to reallocate
limited or diminishing resources.
In this chapter, we will
• Describe how to obtain cost estimates for space system elements
• Provide cost-estimating relationships useful for advanced system planning
• Describe how to assess the uncertainty (risk) in the cost estimates
• Show how cost and design may be integrated.

Input Parameters

~-lrmIJ
BasBIIn&

Concept'A' • • • • • Concept"N"

Assumptions

_ _ and

.--

AssUmJIIlOI18

• Base Year DoIJaJ8
• Exd1Ides Fees

._LJle.Yeara

20.1 Introduction to Cost Analysis

.~

..

• QovemmenI.f'IImIs/I8d

.~1nfra$UCIWD

20.1.1 Elements of Analysis

Figure 20-1 shows the relationships among key elements of cost analysis. The first
step is to develop preliminary cost analysis requirements descriptions which identify
the technical and operational parameters (cost drivers). These become ''inputs'' to cost
models. We will develop just such a description in this chapter for FireSat. Each alternative concept specifies the configuration, number of units, orbits, equipment lists,
hardware and software, and operational staffing needed for costing the system. The
next step in the process is definition of a Work Breakdown Structure (WBS), an organizational table used to categorize and normalize costs. The WBS should cover all
phases of the program. For example, the operations period follows Initial Operating
Capability (ICC) and includes software maintenance costs and spare satellites.
Ground rules and assumptions should be laid out at the outset. These assumptions
establish the foundation for understanding the costs and comparing them with those of
other programs. Example assumptions include:
• Costs listed in constant-year dollars (fiscal funding information records costs
in then-year dollars)
• Inflation rate forecasts (see Sec. 20.1.4)
• Exclusion of contractor fee and costs of the government project office
• Inclusion of government-furnished equipment
• Learning curve percentage (See Sec. 20.4.4)
Once input parameters have been specified and assumptions delineated, cost
models support the preparation of estimates for each design alternative. The models
combine cost data and cost-estimating relationships as described in Sec. 203. The cost
estimates are organized by each segment's work breakdown structure, Iife-cycle
phase, and schedule. Estimates prepared with cost models are not "end products"

785

Introduction to Cost Analysis

20.1

-

:---":'~::;RDT=&E'-

• Tednology LewI

ICC

.t..eamIngRala

TIme(Yeam)

IOC+ 10
IOC m InI!IaI 0peraIlng CapadIy

Total UJ&.CycIe CosIAcIIYIly PhaSe

OutputS

I

c

I

B

A

-

5enoItivIIy AnalySIs

FIg. 21).1. Llfe-Cycle Cost Analysis Approach. This analysis approach is comprehensive and

provides cost information necessary to properly evaluate system candldates.

rom ally, .Is a recommendation
themselves but, rather, means to an end. Th at end,oJl"c
. .forn
the most cost effective design or the most affordable approach that meets ~o
requirements Cost and schedule risk analysis is performed to capture uncertam ~
inherent in the analysis process and include effects of unusual ~ments ~od
beyond state-of-the-art technology. We distribute costs over the operational pen
according to a schedule of events and milestones. ~s sched~~ r;a~~ ~ n =
for early quick-look cost assessments and trade studies. but It IS
e or
profile planning. Cost model outputs include:
. .
• The major cost drivers-elements contributing most to total cost or IDISSlo~
requirements most affecting life-cycle costs
.
• A cost comparison of alternative systems or subsystems fot trade studies
• The sensitivity of Iife-cycJe costs to key assumptions and requirements

786

Cost Modeling

20.1

Fi~ 2C!-2 PfeSe!1ts a more detailed WBS for a space mission which corresponds
to the IDlSSIOn architecture elements of Chaps. 1 and 2, focusing on cost-related
elements. It is very important because it helps us organize data. identify significant
costs, and consistently compare one system to another.

• Lmmch Vehicle
• Lmmch ()poraI!ons

Introduction to Cost Analysis

787

20.1.2 Cost Estimating Methods
The work breakdown structure and system concept provide guidance for determining which cost methods apply. Three basic methods are used to develop cost estimates:
1. In detailed bottom-up estimating we identify and specify at a 10:-" level elements
that make up the system. We then estimate the cost of matenaIs and labor to
develop and produce each element. This method has the, ad~tage o~ ~~g

RDT&E

• Management
• SE&I

20.1

•
•
•
•
•
•

FadIlIIas
EquIpment
SoIlwara
LogisIIcs
Management
SE&I

• p"""",",,,

Training

• MafnIenanco
• Spares
• MIssIon ()poraI!ons

• Command. CommunIca!!ons.
and Control

RDT&E a Rosean:h, DoveIopmont, Test. and EvaIuaIion
O&M a 0peraII0ns and Malntananco
8£&1 a Sys!ams EngInoerfng and InIegndion
• Sys!ams level
• Payload
• Spacecraft Bus

Rg. 20-2. Representative Work Breakdown Structure, WBS. The Work Breakdown Structure
Is an Important tool for organizing cost Information and enSuring consistency In comparing alternatives.

Life-Cycle Costs of a space mission architecture (i.e., the total mission cost from
planning through end-of-life) are broken down into three main phases. The Research,
Development, Test, and Evaluation (ROT&E) phase includes design, analysis, and test
of breadboards, brassboards, prototypes and qualification units. Commonly referred to
as the nonrecurring phase, RDT&E conventionally includes protoflight units and onetime ground station costs. This phase does not include technology development for
sy~tem compone~ts. The ProtIuctio.n. phase incorporates the cost of producing flight
umts and launching them. A definition used to model costs is the Theoretical First
Unit ~, ~hich represe~ts the ~t fli~t-qualified satellite off the line (for singlesatellIte IDlSSIOns the TFU IS the flight article). For multiple units, production cost is
estimated using a learning curve factor applied to the TFU cost as discussed in
Sec. 2~.4.4. Re~l.acement satellites and launches after the space system final
operattng capabIlity (FOC =full complement of on-orbit satellites) has been established are not considered as production units. The Operations and Maintenance
(O&M) phase consists of ongoing operations and maintenance costs, including spacecraft unIt replacements and software maintenance. Although the space, launch, and
ground segments are usually the most importapt elements, O&M can sometimes be the
system's most costly on~ (especially. for constellations and reusable systems). For
most space programs the primary ongoing operations and support costs are ground
station operations and satellite spares; for reusable systems such as the Shuttle this
category consists of the ground crew and operations to support them.
'

explicitly tailored to a specific program and contractor, but Its basIS of validity IS
the credibility of the experts called upon to estimate inputs, such as hours, labor
rates material costs, and indirect costs. Because this method is time consuming
and because detailed design data is usually not available, this method is least
appropriate for preliminary syste~ studies. Bottom-up estimates. are m~t
commonly used during the production phase of a program, after desIgn details
are well known and a majority of technical uncertainties have been resolved
during development.
2. In analogy-based estimating we use the cost of a s~ar item and adjust it for
differences in size or complexity. We can apply this method at any level of
detail in the system, but it is lower fidelity than a bottom-up estimate. This
method also presumes that a sufficiently similar item exists and that we have
detailed cost and technical data on which to base our estimate.
3. In parametric estimating we use a series of mathematical relationships that

relate cost to physical, technical, and performance parameters that are known
to strongly influence costs. An equation called the Cost Estimating Relationship or CER, expresses the cost as a function of parameters. Cost drivers and
fundtion forms are selected based on a combination of engineering judgment
and the statistical quality of the regression results. We may also apply complexity factors to the parameters to account for technology changes.
All three methods have advantages and disadvantages, depending on scope of the
estimating effort and the amount of design and performance information (e.g~ relevant
historical data for analogy) available to estimators. Until recently, parametric models
were avoided as the primary tool for developing a proposal bid and used only as backup to validate another estimate. That situation is beginning to change, mainly due to
the progress of the Parametrics Estimating Initiative led by several cost-estimating
professional societies and endorsed by the DoD:
The primary advantage of parametric models lies in their top-down approach.
System requirements and top-level design. specifications ~ all that are ~uired to
complete a cost estimate with a parametrIc model. DetaIled hardware desIgns and
development schedules do not have to be .~ed to estimate ~osts of can~datt: system
architectures. Incorporation of CERs WIthin a system deslgn!cost-engmeenng tool
allows concept evaluation and technol?gy studies to be conducted. ~arametri~ cost
models are therefore well suited for use 1D cost/performance trade studies that estimate
how cost varies as a function of system requirements, in developmental planning and
architecture studies, and in specific program assessments of cost vs. capability and
• Due to recent downsizing of estimating staffs in government ~d industry and gen~ ~­
ing of the parametric estimating process, the DoD has publicly adv~ application of
parametric estirilating models as the preferred method of proposal estunattng. See the DoD
[1998) for guidance and examples.

lf
I'

fII
II
!,

Cost Modeling

788

20.1

individual parameter sensitivity. Since parameteric cost models are the most appropri_
ate for trade studies, they are the focus of the remainder of this chapter.
Use of a parametric model implies several assumptions. FIrSt, because parametric
models characterize historical cost trends as mathematical relationships, it is assumed
that future costs will reflect these historical trends to some degree. Parametric models
are applicable only to the range of historical data. In cases when major technology
advancements are expected, or when fundamental paradigms in system architecture
are shifted, parametric cost models based on old systems may very well not apply. One
example of this problem is enCountered when large-satellite-based cost models are
used to estimate costs oftoday's smallsats. Such a paradigm shift, and perhaps a technology shift, requires a specialized model. Lacking new technology factors, CERs
mUst be adjusted when applied to systems using beyond state-of-the-art technology.
We derive the CERs from historical data, so their technologies may not reflect the
advances usually considered in futuristic studies.
A second implicit assumption made when using parametric cost models is that
program costs are random variables that cannot be predicted with 100% accuracy.
Many more parameters influence costs than can be incorporated into a set of CERs,
such as skill level of contractor engineers and technicians, occurrence of unforeseen
technical problems, business base of all contractors involved, requirements changes,
and test failures. Parametric cost models use a combination of parameters that explain
historical cost trends while maintaining statistical integrity. Influence of all other variables manifests itself in estimating error, which is often quantified by using underlying
data to calculate the standard error, SE.
There are three general sources for parametric cost estimating models:
• Publicly available special purpose models, such as the Unmanned Space
Vehicle Cost Model (USCM), the Small Satellite Cost Model (SSCM), and the
Communications Payload and Spacebome Electronics Cost Model (CPCM).

Such models are typically developed by the Federal Government and are
usually available to the general public·. See the references at the end of this
chapter for source information.
• Publicly available general purpose models, offered privately by commercial
organizations such as PRICE Systems and SEER Systems. These general
purpose models typically must be calibrated to the user's specific products and
processes before they can be used for estimating space hardware and software
components.
• Private specific purpose models, usually developed by a single organization
from proprietary information, to estimate company-specific systems and components only.
'
In Sec. 20.3 we present CERs for computing the cost of space systems based on
publicly available models. If these models do not apply to a specific concept, we may
need to derive new relationships. The following section summarizes this process.
Fisher [1970) provides a comprehensive discussion.

• Although we refer primarily to government programs and data, the models may be applied to
commercial programs. The recommended cost models are appropriate for both large and small
missions. (See Sec. 20.3.)

789

Introduction to Cost Analysis

20.1

201.3 Cost Model Development
'F gure 20-3 shows the procedure for developing a CER that represents how the cost
1 roes of a system or subsystem vary with characteristic ~ters. The first
pro~ t in defining a set of CERs is a historical database. ExtensIve research and
: : co~ection based on actual cost and technical data is needed. It's important to ~d
ut as much as possible about the origin of the data and the reference for meas~g
o baraCteristic physical parameters. We must also separate the cost elements mto
~~ arable physical subsystems or components, which become the costing elem~ts
we !e to establish the entire system cost. Programs either already completed or a-:Vlll•t. launch within a year should be targeted as opposed to programs that are still m
stages of development. Most costs in the database should be actual program costs
'on In cases where satellites are nearly complete but have not yet been
at completi .
.
used
launched, contractor estimates-at-completlon costs may be
.

:IY

r

I

I

SubsyStem N

r

Identify
Correlation

subsystem B

~
[§)
TiiiT ~

1SubsystemA

SubsyStem A

......

Regression
Analysis

Constant Year Costs

Develop
Database

Preferred Form
$=AW b
Perform Regression

SubsVstem N
Subsystem B

$

~k9

Key Statistics
• Coefficient of Determination, R2
• Standard Error, SE

_-til.....

CER and StatIstIcs

AnalysIs

Fig. 20-3. Deriving CERs from Actuals. The key to a credible CER Is an accurate database of
relevant historical information from actual programs.

It is also important to normalize the hist~rical data so i.t is consistenl-Correctly
categorized between nonrecurring and recurnng ~os~ and 1D th~ same co~tant-ye~
dollars. Then, we would compensate for econolDlC differences 1D production quan~­
ties. The design or performance parameters to which costs will be related must be 1D
the same units. These include programmatic, weight-based, and perfo~ce parameters for the satellite in general and each of the m~jor s~bs~stems. We typically excl~de
the prime contractor's fee but include all other direct, m~t, and general and administrative costs. Award fees and incentives are usually not mcluded, nor ~ gov~e~t
costs (Le., costs associated with the government procurement agency if one eXIsts).
After cost data are properly categorized and normalized. ~e task of ~ ru:ve~op­
ment begins. To allow credible subsystem-level cost analySIS of potentiallDl~I?ns
without requiring a detailed design we need to relate cost ~ techni~ charactenstics.
Other factors, named wraps, model nonphysical factors not mcluded m the CER, s~ch
as system engineering management, and product assurance, as well as the cost of mtegrating and testing the space system. Wraps typically account for about 3~% ?f the
development cost for space systems. Choosing cost drivers involves a combmation of
• A fee should ~ added if we want to detennine the purchase Jl!ice. This fee is normally ~
negotiated value, but 10% is typical for a cost analySIs. In addi!i0n, be aware of the need
incIu~e subcontractor fees according to the planned contractor tier ammgements.

790

Cost Modeling

20.1

statistics, engineering judgment, and often, common sense. We would hypothesize a
relationship between costs and the explanatory parameters. For conceptual studies-the primary focus of this book-we would limit the parameters to one or two per
subsystem.
For space systems, cost drivers would be primarily weight, power, and performance
requirements, the parameters most likely to be available during an advanced system
study. For example, in the derivation of the CER for the electrical power subsystem,
we might consider the following: mass, beginning-of-life power, solar array area, onorbit average power, design life, battery capacity, solar cell type, battery type, and
payload power. As another example, if the attitude control subsystem is of interest, we
would examine parameters such as pointing accuracy, knowledge, and required slew
rate. We prefer to use a power law for relationships (see Fig. 20-3) because it allows
for expected nonlinearities, and can be easily accommodated by standard regression
packages. Also, since weight is often a key parameter for cost-estimating relationships, the power function with an exponent of less than one models the expected
diminishing effects of increasing weight on costs. This highlights a danger not to
forget: that all CERs are simplifications of the relationship they are emulating.
Weight-driven CERs, for example, imply that lighter structures cost less. In fact, the
opposite may be true. We need to recognize that when designers deliberately reduce
weight, they may increase complexity, trade away ease of manufacturing an integra_
tion, or use inherently more expensive materials.
When deriving CERs we take note of statistical outliers and follow up to ascertain
whether or not apparent discrepancies are attributable to numerical errors or nontraditional ways of accounting for certain costs. We evaluate the "goodness" of the
relationship by evaluating the costs against their corresponding parameters USing
regression software. For further information on statistics and regression techniques,
see, for example, Book and Young [1995J. The regression results in an equation between cost and the parameter or parameters, as well as statistics that indicate how well
the relationship fits the data. Measures of the goodness of fit include the coefficient of
determination, R2, and the standard e"or, SE. R2, is dimensionless between 0 and l.
SE is in units of cost or a percentage of the estimated cost depending on whether an
additive or multiplicative error regression approach is used. A strong correlation is
represented by R2 near 1 and SE near O. SE is important in evaluating the uncertainty
in estimates as discussed in Sec. 20.4.
For additional information on space cost model development and space costing,
see, for example, Apgar [1990J, DISA [1997J, Greenberg and Hertzfeld [1994J, and
Hamaker [1989J. For a discussion of cost modeling for low-cost missions see Wertz
and Larson [1996J and Sarsfield [1998].

20.1.4 Types of Dollars
For consistency in referring to costs and to avoid confusion in the review of cost
analysis results, constant-year dollars should be used. For examples in this chapter,
Fiscal Year 2000 dollars (FYOO$) are assumed. This simplifies the computations and
interpretation of results, especially in making comparisons of alternatives. If project
funding by year is required, then the costs should be spread first by year in constant
dollars and converted to real or then-year dollars by mUltiplying each year's funding
by an appropriate inflation factor. Table 20-1 provides a table of inflation factors for
1980-2020 relative to FY2000 as provided by the Office of the Secretary of Defense.

The Parametric Cost Estimation Process

20.2

791

Inflation Factors Relative to the Year 2000 Based on ProJections by the
TABLE 20-1. OffIce of the Secretary of Defense (January 1998). See text for discussion.

-

FIscal Year
(FY)
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1986
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000

InflaUon Factor
to Base Year 2000
0.456
0.510
0.559
0.610
0.658
0.681
0.700
0.719
0.740
0.771
0.802
0.837
0.860
0.883
0.901
0.918
0.937
0.958
0.970
0.984
1.000

RscaIYear
(FY)

2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020

Inflation Factor
to Base Year 2000
1.017
1.034
1.052
1.075
1.099
1.123
1.148
1.173
1.199
1.225
1252
1.279
1.308
1.336
1.366
1.396
1.427
1.458
1.490
1.523

To convert costs from any year to fiscal year 2000 dollars (FYOO$), divide. by the
inflation factor in the table. To convert from FYOO$ to other year dollars multiply by
the factor for that year. For conversion to years other ~ 2000, we calculate a new
inflation factor as the ratio of the factors for the years of mterest.

20.2 The Parametric Cost Estimation Process
Table 20-2 summarizes the procedure to compute parametric cost estimates ~~g
the cost models of this chapter. The information needed about the system design IS
h
. Table 20-3 along with values developed previously for the FireSat e~amp~e.
s own
lD shown follow the general process 0 f F'19. 20-1 . The procedure
The
steps
. . begms WIth
developing the WBS and collecting the relevant space system ch~teristics. The next
four steps develop the primary elements of life-cyc1e costs. ~mputing the costs f~
space launch and ground segments, followed by the operations and ~=. Th~
bfor estimating each cost item are given in Sec. 20.3. CERs are proVl . at e~
system level for RDT&E and TFU costs. They have been adjusted to esmn:m:
.
ear 2000 (FYOO) costs. The TFU is the basis for computing the cost of multiple ~ts
in production as described in Sec. 20.4.4. Factors for program level costs and hen tage
are shown in Tables 20-7 and 20-8.

Cost ModeHng

792

TABLE 20-2. Parametric Cost estimation Process. this process provides an estimate of the
totallife-cycle cost.
Step
1. Develop Work Breakdown Structure
-Identify all cost elements
2. Ust Space System Characteristics
-Identify advanced technology parameters
3. ComJ)ute Space Segment Cost
-ADT&Ecost
- Software cost
- Theoretical first unit cost
- Subsequent unit costs
4. Compute Launch Segment Cost
5. Com~e Ground Segment Cost
- rst ground station
- SoftWare cost
- Additional ground stations
- Earth terminals
S. Compute Operations and Maintenance Cost
- Space segment spares
- Launch costs for spares
- Ground system operations and support
7. UFE-CYCLE COST

Aeferance
Rg.20-2
Table 20-3
Table 20-8
Tables 20-4, 20-S, 20-9
Table 20-10
Tables 20-5, 20-S, 20-9
Sec. 20.4
Table 20-14
Table20-11
Table 20-10
Table 20-11
Table 20-13
Sec. 20.5
Table 20-14
Table 20-12
Sum of items 3-6 above

20.2.1 FireSat Cost Element Definitions

We include these items in each of the subsystems to be estimated:
• Payload: this includes communication systems and sensors (visible and IR).

Some assumptions were made regarding electronic weights as these parameters were not available from the conceptual design.
• Spacecraft Bus: this is the spacecraft less the payload. Primary cost driver is

mass.
• Structure: spacecraft structure items including enclosures, deployable compo-

nents, supporting structure and launch vehicle interface. The spacecraft
structure carries and protects the spacecraft and payload equipment through
launch and deployment Mass is the key metric that determines cost.
• Thermal: structure and devices for the purpose of maintaining all elements of
a satellite system within required temperature limits. Thermal control systems
may be classified as passive or active. An example of a passive system is
paints, coatings and blankets, and a space radiator coupled to heat sources by
conductive paths such as base plates. Active thermal-control subsystems
include pumped-loop systems, heaters controlled by thermostats, mechanical
devices (e.g. louvers) and refrigerators. In generaI,passive systems cost less
than active systems.
• Electrical Power Subsystem (EPS): solar arrays, batteries, harness, and power
management electronics. EPS mass, used in the cost model, is largely

influenced by space radiation, which degrades performance of solar cells over
time (FrreSat has a 5-year design life). Choices for off-the-shelf solar-array

cells include silicon or gaIIium arsenide. Battery choices include NiCd and
NiH2 •

793

The Parametric Cost Estimation Process

20.2

. Space MissIon Characteristics RequIred for parametric Cost Modeling.

TABLE 20-3

Characteristic

1. Constellation
No. of spacecraft In constellation
Orbit altitude
2. External Communications Resources

Reference

F1reSat Example

Sees. 7.1,7.6
Sees. 3.3, 7.4

700km

Sees. 13.1, 13.2
Sees. 13.1, 132

TOAS
DomSat

2

No
No

3. Space Segment
Payload

Type

.

Weight (Communications)
Aperture (lA, Visible)
Spacecraft bus
Dry weight by subsystem
Volume
Pointing accuracy
Pointing knowledge
Stabilization type
Right software lines of code
Average power
BOLpower
EOLPower
Solar array area
Battery capacity
Data storage capacity
Number of thrusters
Space segment design life

Sec. 9.1
Sec. 13.4
Sec. 9.3

IA
N1A
0.26m

Sees. 102, 10.3

Table 10-30
107m3
0.1 deg
< 0.1 deg
3-axls
26K
110W
NA
NA
8.5m2
17.5A-hr

Sec. 10.5.1
Sec. 11.1
Sec. 11.1
Sec. 10.4.2
Sec.1S2
Sec.10.S
Sec. 10.6
Sec. 10.42
Sec. 10.6
Sec. 11.42
Sec. 11.3
Sec. 11.1.4
Sec. 10.4

4. Launch Segment
Launch vehicle
Upper stage
Launch site
No. of spacecraft per launch

Sees. 18.1, 182
Sees. 18.1, 182
Sees. 18.1, 182
Sees. 18.1,182

Pegasus

Sees. 13.1, 15.6

1 fixed

5. Ground Segment
No. of fixed and mobile sites
Software language
Unesofcode
New or existing equipment and facilities

4
5yrs.

None
N1A
1

Sec. 16.3

Ada

Sec. 16.3

100K

Sec. 152

New

Sec. 13.3.5

8-band

Mission duration from IOC·

Sec. 1.4

10yrs.

No. of personnel

Sec. 14.3

10

No. of spare spacecraft

Sec. 19.1

0

No. of Shuttle support flights

Sec. 19.1

0

Communications operating frequency
S. Mission OperatIons and Support

.ICC

=Initial Operatfng Capability =time of launch of first satelUle to provide operational data.

794

Cost Modeling

20,2

Cost Estimating Relationships

ZO.3

795

20.3 Cost Estimating Relationsbips
• Tracking, Telemetry, and Command and Data Handling (TT&ClDH): com-

mand/telemetry electronics, onboard computers, transponders, transmitters
receivers, data storage, antennas, and associated avionics. Primary cost driv~
of the IT&C/DH subsystem are subsystem mass, frequency of the UPlink and
downlink, and data rate. In some cases, this is further divided into IT&C (the
communications system) and C&DH (the spacecraft computer plus other data
storage and hand1ing equipment).
• Attitude Determination and Control Subsystem (ADCS): stabilizes and orients

!
I

I

'i

FrreSat during its mission using sensors and actuators. ADCS is tightly
coupled to other subsystems, especially the propulsion subsystem. The prima.
ry drivers are requirements for pointing knowledge, control stability, and
maneuvering (such as slewing or payload repointing). The FrreSat mission
requires a 3-axis control system to point in a specific direction to within 0.25
deg; knowledge of spacecraft attitude is 0.10 deg.
• Propulsion: Provides thrust for attitude control and orbit correction. FIreSat

uses a liquid system for on-orbit attitude correction and maneuvering (Table
7-3). The relevant cost drivers are the propulsion subsystem bus dry mass of
8.4 kg (Table 10-31) and the spacecraft dry mass of 112 kg (Sec. 10.6). If orbit
insertion requires an apogee kick motor, additional costs should be assessed.
• Integration, Assembly, and Test (1A&T): labor and material costs (Primarily
testing) for integrating spacecraft and payload subsystems into an operational
space vehicle. Does not include costs for integrating components into a
subsystem (these costs are included in the subsystem CERs) or for integrating
the space vehicle with the launch vehicle. The total cost of IA&T for a satellite
includes researchlrequirements specification, design and scheduling analysis
of IA&T procedures, systems test and evaluation, and test data analysis.
• Program Level: contractor costs for systems engineering, program manage.
ment. reliability, planning, requirements tlowdown, quality assurance, project
control, data preparation, and other costs which cannot be assigned to individual hardware or software components. Program management includes efforts
associated with planning and directing prime and subcontractor efforts and
interactions. System engineering includes activities required to ensure that all
satellite subsystems and payloads function properly to achieve system goals
and requirements. Data and report generation is a program-level function that
includes efforts required to produce internal and deliverable documentation.
• Ground Support Equipment (GSE): test and support equipment needed for
assembly, development and acceptance testing and iDtegration of satellite
subsystems and satellite to the launch vehicle. This equipment is required to
support the satellite and provide physical, electrical, and data interfaces with
the satellite during IA&T. It is therefore classified as a nonrecuning cost.
• Launch and Orbital Operations Support (LOOS): planning and operations
related to launch and orbital checkout of the space system. These costs are

those costs typically incurred by the spacecraft prime contractor involving
prelaunch planning, trajectory analysis, launch site support, launch-vehicle
integration (spacecraft portion), and initial on-orbit operations before ownership of the satellite is turned over to the operational user (typically 30 days).
They are generally categorized as recurring costs.

This section presents the specific CERs recommended for preliminary mission
analysis and design.
20.31 Space Segment Costs
.
The CERs of Tables 20-4, 20-5, and 20-6 may be used to estim~te costs m thousands of fISCal year 2000 constant dollars as a function of the ~fied p~e~.
Sec 20 1 4 for conversion to other years.) These CERs are derived from histoncal
(See
~~fore their validity is limited to a range of parameter values. The tables
the range of application; to preserve their validity, the equations should
be
P ed further than 25% beyond the parameter ranges given. The CERs were denved
us. different satellite data, statistical frameworks, and error models as noted. Some
~ provide total subsystem cost while others estimate RDT&E and ~eparately.
Differences between the ROT&E and TFU CER ranges are due to availab~lity of data.
For some subsystems, an alternate C~ is pre~en~ to acco~odate a different cost
driver. Generally, TFU CERs show higher vanabihty.

i

da~

n~t

!f1!

CERs for EstImating Subsystem RDT&E Cost (FYOO$I<). Applicable range for
TABLE 20-4. a good estimate is 25% above and below this data range. CER represents contractor cost without fee.
Cost

Parameter,

Input Data

Component

X(UnJt)

Range

RDT&ECER*
(FYOO$K)

SE
(%)

aperture lila (m)
aperture lila (m)
comrn. subsystem wi. (kg)
spacecraft dry wi. (kg)
structure wi. (kg)

0212

356,851 )(0.562

53,559t

0212

128,827 )(0.562

19,336t

65-395
235-1.153

353.3 X
101 X

51

54-392

157 Xo.83

38

3-48

394 X1O.635

45

210-404

32

payload wi. (kg)
Xl = EPS wi. (kg)
X2 =BOL power (W)
TT&ClDH wi. (kg)

1.1 X10.610 X2O.943

3!-491
100-2,400

57

12-65

62.7 Xl
2.63 (Xl X2l 0.112
545 XO.761

ADCS wi. (kg)

20-160

464 XO.8B7

48

AKM

81-966

17.8 )(0.75

2,703
395,529

989+0215X

46

4.607
523.757
24,485581,637

1.963 X0.841 .

36

9.262 )(0.642

34

1. Payload
1.1 IR Sensor
12 VIsIble Ugh! Sensor
1.3 CommunlcatIons
2. Spacecraft
2.1 Structure

22 Thermal

2.3 Bectrical Power System
(EPS)
2.4 Telemetry, Tracking &
Command {TT&C)lDH*
2.5 Attitude Determination &
Controi Sys. (ADCS)
2.6 Apogee Kick Motor (AKM)

=!henna! wi. (kg)
X2 =spacecraft wt. +
Xl

33

36

57

wi. (kg)

3. Integration, Assembly & Test
(iA&T)

4. Program Level
5. Ground Support Equipment
(GSE)

6. launch & Orbi1ai Operations
SliJ)port (LOOS)

spacecraft bus + payload
totai ROT&E cost (FVOO$K)
spacecraft bus + payload
totai ROT&E cos! (FVOO$K)
spacecraft bus + payload
totai ROT&E cost (FVOO$K)
N1A

• Taken from USCM. 7th edltion (1994) using minimum. unbiased percentage error CERa.

* Includes

• TT&C and C&DH are desired use a 0.4510.55 split
t Absolu\e error (in FYOO$K). not percentageERserrolfo

spacecraft .computer. Hseparate C r .

I'

I

1

796

II

I
I

Cost Modeling

TABLE 20-5.

20.3

CERs for EstImating Subsystem Theoretical FIrst Unit (TFU) Cost.

Cost
Component

Parameter.
X (Unit)

Input Data
Range

TFUCER*

SE

(FYOO$K)

(%)

Cost-EstImating ReJationshlps for Earth-orbltlng Small Satellites including
TABLE 20-6. RDT&E and Theoretical FIrst Unit. Total subsystem cos! in FYOO$M as a function of the independent variable, X '
Cost

1. Payload
1.1 IR SellSOr

:f,

0.2-1.2

142.742 )(0.562

21.4241

aperture.dla. (m)

0.2-1.2

51.469 )(0.562

7.734t

cornm. subsystem
wi. (kg)

65-395

140 X

43

spacecraft dry wi. (kg)

154-1.389

43X

36

2.1 Structure

structure wi. (kg)

54-560

13.1 X

39

2.2 Thermal

thermal wi. (kg)

3-87

SO.6 XO.707

61

2.3 ElecIricaI Power System
(EPS)

EPS·wI. (kg)

31-573

112 )(0.763

44

2.4 Telemetry. Tracking &
Command (TT&C)lDH*

TT&CJDH wi. (kg)

13-79

635 X 0.568

41

2.5 Attitude Determination &
Control Sys. (ADCS)

ADCS wi. (kg)

1.2 VisIble Ugh! Sensor

:1:,

eomponent
aperture dla. (m)

1.3 Communications
2. Spacecraft

2.6 Apogee KIck Motor (AKM)
3. Integration. Assembly & Test
(IMT)
4. Program Level

20-192

293 XO.777

81-966

4.97 )(0.823

20

spacecraft bus wi.
payload wi. (kg)

155-1.390

10.4 X

44

spacecraft + payload total
recurring cost (FYOO$K)

15.9291.148.084

5. Ground Support Equipment
(GSE)

NlA

6. Launch & Orbital Operations
Support (LOOS)

spacecreft bus + payload
wi. (kg)

1. payload
2. Spacecraft
2.1 S\nIllIUrBt
2.2 Thermal*

c2.3 Elactrica! Power
System (EPS)

Input Data

Parameter.

Range

x(UnJt)

1.922-50.651
Spacecraft Total Cost
(FYOO$K)
20-400
SateDJte bus dry wi. (kg)
5-100
Structures wl (kg)
ThennaJ control wi. (kg)

2.4a Telemetry Tracking
& Command (TT&C)-

5-12

39

2.4b Command & Data
HandlIng (C&DH)

4.9X

42

t

Absolute error (FYOO$K). not percentage error.
:j: Includes spacecraft computer. H separate CERs for TT&C and C&CH are desired. use a 0.4510.55 split.

781 + 26.1 X1.261

3,696

299 + 14.2 X InOO

1.097

248 + 4.2 X2

119
127

Power system wi. (kg)

-926 + 398 )(0.72

910

Solar array area (m2)

0.3-11

210.631 +
213,527)(O.00e6

1.647

5-32

375 + 494 )(0.754

1.554

BOL Power (W)

20-480

-5.850 + 4.629

1.585

EOL Power (W)

)(0.15

5-440

131 + 401 )(0.452

1.603

TT&CJDH wi. (k9)

3-30

357 + 40.6 X1.35

629

DownlInk data rate

1 1.000

3.636 3.057
X-o.23

1,248

3-30

484 + 55 X'.35

854

0.02 100

27,235+
29.388)(O.IJ079

1.606

1-25

1,358 + 8.58 X2

1.113

341 + 2651 X-o.s

1.505

TT&C + DH wi. (kg)

Pointing knowledge
(deg)
SateDIte Bus dry wi. (kg)

0.25-12
0.1-3

2,643

1.364InOO

1.795

20-400

65.6 + 2.19)(1.261

310

Setellite volume (mS)

0.03-1.3

1539 + 4341n(X)

398

Number of Thrusters

1-6

4.303-3.903X-o.s

834

1.922
SO.651**

0.139 X

0.139 xSEt.us

3. Integration. Assembly
& Test (IA&T)

Spacecrall total cost
Spacecrall total cost

1.922
SO.651**

0.229 X

0.229 xSEt.us

4. Program Level

Spacecraft total cost

1.922
SO.651**

0.066 X

O.066xSEt.us

5. Ground Support
Equipment (GSE)

Spacecraft total cost

1,922
SO.651**

0.061 X

0.061 xSEt.us

6. Launch & Orbital
Operations Support
(LOOS)

2.6 propulslontt

The CERs for the payload and spacecraft bus subsystems are primarily based on
parameters available during the concept and mission design phase. The models cover
both the subsystem and system levels with the user choosing the appropriate level. The
models used here are publicly-available. special-purpose models, developed by the
U.S. Air Force and NASA. These CERs were obtained from the Unmanned Space
Vehicle Cost Model, Seventh Edition [SMC. 1994], the Communications Payload and
Spaceborne Electronics Cost Model [MCR Federal, 1997], and a derivative of the
Small Satellite Cost Model [Bearden et al., 1996]. Other models that could be used in
lieu of those given in the tables are given by Burgess, Lao, and Bearden [1995], and
Management Consulting and Research, Inc. [1986].
The primary categories of costs are hardware, software and program level (or wraparounds) used to indicate that the estimates for these functions are based upon percentages of hardware cost. Wraps are costs associated with labor-intensive activities where
a level of manpower is allocated over some period of performance. The functions in
this category are management, systems engineering, product assurance, and system
tests. The CERs of Tables 20-4, 20-5, and 20-6 provide the overall program level costs
and Table 20-7 provides an allocation of program level costs to the wrap components.

0.4xSEt.us

710

2.5 AttItude Determination ADCS dry wl (kg)
& Control Sys. (ADCS)
Pointing accuracy (deg)

* Taken from USCM. 7th edition (1994) using minimum, unbiased percentage error CERs.

0.4 X

5-410

Data Storage capacity
(MB)

348-1.537

(FYOO$K)

Average power (W)

(Kbps)
0.341 X

SE

SUbsyStem Cost
CER* (FYOO$K)

183 + 181 )(0.22

Battery capacity (A·hr)

34

AKMwI. (kg)

7fJ7

Cost Estimating Re1ationships .

20.3

(FYOO$K)
(FYOO$K)
(FYOO$K)
(FYOO$K)

=

Sat:.!.?....
c:n

eI [8eanIen. BoudreaUI!, and Wertz. 1996). adjusted tor
* CERs ~ on the Sman
b
subsystem cost using the percentages from Table 20-9.
inflation as shown In Table 20-1. __•
of advarICBd materials (e.g. composIteS, magnasfum).
t Aluminum matertaJs primarily with .............. use
Thermal CER appropriate for passive systems only.
.. CER appUes to UHFNHF and 8-band LE°statl~plng systems only. CER not appropriate for blpropellanl
tt Hydrazlne monopropellanl and cold-gas
or dual-mode systems. Costs ofcalcuAKMlaledaranotuslnglncl~a"mt max values of Input data range for spacecraft bus
Input data range for Items 3-6
cost CER In Item 2.

*

**

I'

I

'I
798

i

Cost ModeHng

TABLE 20-7. Allocation of Program-Level Cost We allocate the program level or wrap costs
In Tables 20-4, 20-5, and 20-6 to their components as shown.
Program Level
Component

RDT&E

Theoret/cal
F1rstUnH

Program Management

20%

3O"1c.

Systems EngIneering

40%

20%

Product Assurance

20%

3O"1c.

System Evaluation

20%

20%

TABLE 20-8. Heritage Cost Factors. We apply these factors to the CERs and theIr standard
errors from Tables 20-4, 20-5, and 20-6 as described in the text. Data from
Hamaker [1987].

,II.
I:,.

Cost Estimating Relationships

20.3

Mult/pUcatJve Factors for Development HerJtagi
(Apply to RDT&E Costs Only)
New desIgn witn advanced development
> 1.1
NomInal new deslgn-some heritage
1.0
Major modification to existing design
0.7-0.9
Moderate modifications
0.4-0.6
BasIcally existing desIgn
0.1-0.3

Recurring and Nonrecurring Factors
Nonrecurring costs include all efforts associated with design, drafting, engineering
unit IA&T, ground support equipment, and a portion of program management and system engineering costs. This includes all costs associated with design verification and
interface requirements (e.g. drawings, schematics, mocIrups, boilerplates. breadboards
and brassboards). Recurring costs cover all eff0!t8 associated with flight hardware
manufacture, IA&T, and a portion of program management and system engineering
costs. The CERs in Tables 20-4 and 20-5 are aIready separated between RDT&E (nonrecurring) and TFU (recurring) costs. Since the CERs in Table 20-6 provide estimates
of total subsystem cost, factors for the split between RDT&E and TFU are needed. To
meet this need, we present a list of recurring and nOnrecurring factors in Table 20-9.
These factors can be applied to estimated total subsystem costs from CERs to obtain
estimates of the recurring and nonrecurring portions. Total production costs for all
flight units are computed by multiplying the TFU cost by the learning curve factor L
described in Sec. 20.4.4.

Prototype vs. ProtoOight Approach
A protoflight approach is one in which the quaIification test unit is refurbished for
flight The CERs in Table 20-4 assume a prototype approach, Le., include the cost of
one quaIification unit The small-satellite CERs in Table 20-6 assume a protoflight
approach. The protoflight approach saves on costs since no "dead end" hardware will
result For refurbishment of the qualification unit to become the protoflight unit, 30%
of the TFU should be added to the RDT&E cost The RDT&E estimate will then
include the first flight article.
Heritage Factors

Table 20-8 presents factors for development heritage. These are multiplicative factors to be applied to the RDT&E CER for design maturity of a given subsystem. The
difficulty in incorporating heritage information in cost estimation has been, and continues to be, the quantification of heritage; part of this problem stems from a lack of a

799

TABLE 20-9. Breakdown of SmaU SateUIte Costs. These factors can be appUed to overall
small spacecraft costs to estimate the cost of constituent subsystems and the
RDT&E vs. TFU costs. In the first column, 100%;TotaI spacecraft hardware cost,
excluding payload and wraps. Data on cost breakdown by subsystam courtesy
Microcosm; derived from Wertz and Larson [1996} and Sarsfield [1998}. Comparable factors can be found In Bearden [19991 and Sadln and Davis [1993}. Recurring vs. Nonrecurring estimates are from Bearden, Burgess, and Lao [1995]. The
final row represents the total system cost exclusive of launch cost and operations.

Subsystem/Activity

Fraction of
Spacecraft Bus

Non-Recurring

Recurring

Percentage

Percentage

Cost(%)

(%)

(%)

40.0"/0

60%

4O"1c.

100.0%

60%

40%

2.1 Structure

18.3%

70%

30%

2.2 Therma/

2.0%

50"1c.

5O'ro

1.0Pay/oad
Bus Total

2.3EP5

23.3%

62%

38"/0

2.48 TT&C

12.6%

71%

29%

2.4bC&DH

17.1 %

71%

29%

2.5ADCS

18.4%

37%

63%

8.4%

50"/0

50%

2.6 Propulsion

.

Wraps
3.0IA&T

13.9%

0%

100%

4.0 Program Level

22.9%

50"/0

50%

6.6%

100%

0"1c.

6.1%
189.5%

0"/0

100%
97.5%

5.0G5E
6.0 L005
Total

92.0%

• Propulsion costs may be excluded If, as Is the case with many smaIJ satemtes, the spacecraft doesn't have a
propulsion system.

standard definition for heritage. We define heritage as the percentage of a subsystem
that is identical to one or more previous spacecmft, by mass. This ha;s the appeal .of
being a measurable quantity, but has some obvious drawbacks. For Instance, while
mass may be a reasonable measure of design heritage for structures, it may not be
appropriate for the TT&C subsystem. With this in mind. heritage is ~ value, from 0%
(no heritage) to 100% (all heritage), which varies by subsystem and IS best eval~~
by subsystem design experts. For example, if the ~ubs~ste~ represe»;ts an. ex~ting
design with 70% heritage, the developments costs will pnmanly be en~neenng interface and drawing modifications so that only 30% of the RDT&E cost IS needed.
Commercial Missions
The CERs presented here were derived primarily from government procurements.
We should apply a RDT&E factor of 0.8 when the CERs are used t? estimate comm~­
cial satellite costs. This is an average factor based upon companson of COlDDlerCIal
communication satellites with government-procured communication satellites. Smith.
Stucker and Simmons [1985] have perfonned a comprehensive study that indicates a
19% cost growth for military satellite contracts com~ to ~% f?J ~omm~ial. The
rationale for the difference is the higher level of uncertainty In IDISSIOD ~wrem~nts
as more changes typically occur on the military programs. However, their findings
indicate little difference in unit recurring costs.

11' 1'1
800

Cost Modeling

20.3

Ground Segment Development CoSt Model. For preliminary m~~:t:e;:~~
this should be used In conjunction with the software cost es
Table2G-10

20.3.2 Software Costs
Table 20-10 presents software costing relationships for flight and ground software.
It also provides factors for various programming languages. Section 1633 discUSSes
software development costs further. Flight software is assumed to cost more (per
KLOC) because there is more testing required to meet mission criticality. If software
reuse is employed, the heritage factors in Table 20-8 apply.
TABLE 20-10.

Software Development Costs. RDT&E costs only (in FYoo$K). See
Sec. 16.2.2 for estimates of the lines of code.

FOght Software
Ground Software

435XKLOC

TABLE 2G-11.

Development Cost
Cost DlstrlbuUon <%>

Ground StaUon Bement

Development Cost as
Percent of Software Cost <%>

Facnitles (FAC)

6

18

Equipment (EQ)

27

81

SoftWare (SW)

33

100

5

15

Logistics
systems Level

220XKLOC

KLOC = Thousand of Unes of Code; cost without fee

Management
Systems Engineering

FACTORS FOR OTHER LANGUAGES
Language

881

Cost Estimating Relationships

20.3

Factor

Ada

1.00

UNIX-C

1.67

PASCAL

1.25

FORTRAN

0.91

6

18

10

30

Product Assurance

5

15

Integration and Test

8

24

TABLE 20-12.

OperaUons and Support Cost In FYOO$. See text for detaUs.

MaIntenance

0.1 x (SW + EQ + FAC)/year

Contractor Labor

$160K/StaffYear

Government Labor

$110K/Staff Year

20.3.3 Ground Segment and Operations Costs
Ground segment costs vary significantly depending upon the purposes of the
ground stations. For most ground station cost estimates, we must state requirements
for square footage of facilities, and an equipment list of specific items (computers, RF
equipment, and so forth) which are typically not determined during the concept development stage of a program.
For this model, the costs for various elements of a ground station will be based
upon typical distribution of costs between software, equipment, facilities and wraps,
as Table 20-11 indicates. The distribution is fairly representative of a number of
space projects. For preliminary mission design, this may be translated into estimated
costs as follows. First, compute the software costs from Table 20-10. Then estimate
other ground segment costs as a percent of software costs using the representative
distributions of Table 20-11. A column to simplify this calculation has been added
to the table.
The operations and support costs during the operational phase of the ground
segment consist primarily of contractor and government personnel costs as well as
maintenance costs of the equipment, software, and facilities. Table 20-12 presents
expressions for these costs. The labor rates include overhead costs and other typical
expenses associated with personnel. For smaller Earth terminals, Table 20-13 provides
some typical costs of communications equipment for commonly used frequency
bands.

,
Cost (FYOO$K)

Frequency
SHF

(50 x D) + (400 x P) + 1,800

K,CBand

640

Ku Band

750

o = antenna diameter In m

P

=RF power In kW

20.3.4 Launch Costs
The launch cost model includes vehicIe costs and operations costs at the
. launch
.ficant

toca~on

(Table 20-14~!: :~:n:~~o::;i::r ~:~~:~;e~:n:e;:::at are
bl
hicles such as the Space Shuttle,
portion of the costs an
nted in terms of a unit
constrained by launch mass. For reusa e ve
operations represent the predominant costs. The costs are prese
. based upon a
the e~ception of th~ Shuttle,
U:~:~~~!:~ults in larger
launch cost
formula using eIther weIght or length m the S~uttl I ~'to LEO This indicates the
costs. The chart also indica~ the COS~g 0 ~~~~ in extra~lating to costs for
range. of cost and payload SIZe an~.proVl es gw
new launch vehicles to be competitive.

wit!t

w::

Ii

"

"

802

Cost ModeDng

TABLE 20-14.

20.3

Launch Vehicle Costs In FYOO$M. The data assumes launch from the
~untry's main site. Except where noted, LEO altitude is 185 km and Inclinatlo

IS 28.5 deg (5.2 deg for Ariana). Data from lsakowltz [1995]

I

MaxImum Payload-to-Orblt (kg)

I

Launch Vehicles

!

LEO

!

I

GTO

Unit Cost
GEO

Cost per kg

to LEO

(FYOO$M)

(FYoo$KIkg)
12.2-13.7

USA
6,580

2,810

8(Hj()

AtlasliA

7,280

3,039

Atlas liAS

85-95

11.7-13.0

8,640

3,606

100-11,0

11.6-12.7

Athena 1

. 800

18

A1hena2

22.5

1,950

26

Athena 3

13.3

3,650

31

Delta II (7920, 7925)

5,089

Pegasus XL

1,840

8.5

50-55

. 9.8-10.8

460

13

SatumV

28.3

127,000

820

6.5

Shuttle' (IUS or TOS)

24,400

TItan II

1,905

TItan IV

21.640

Taurus

1,400

5,900

8,620

2,360
5,760
(Centaur)

450

400

16.4

37

19.4

214
(270)

9.9

20-22

14.3-15.7

ESA
Ariane 4 (AR40)

4,900

2,050

Ariane 4 (AR42P)

6,100

2,840

50-65
65-80

Ariana 4 (AR44L)

10.7-13.1

9,600

4,520

95-120

Ariana 5 (550 km)

9.9-12.5

18,000

6,800

130

7.2

75

5.5

10.2-13.3

CHINA

Long March C23B

13,600

4,500

2,250

RUSSIA

803

20.4 Other Topics
20.4.1 Cost Modeling Errors and Cost-Risk Analysis
parametric cost modeling relies on a statistical analysis of past data to project future
costs. Evaluating the statistical uncertainty associated with this projection is called
cost-risk analysis because it represents the probabilistic risk that the program cannot
be completed within a specified cost limit This limit is usuiilly set as the projected cost
plus a cost margin or management reserve, typically on the order of 20% for major
programs
• tenet 0 f parametric
. cost m
odelin'
.
The bas'IC
g IS to base esbIDates
0 f what sateIiites
will cost next time on what they cost last time. If you're developing a space system
under exactly the same circumstances as before (the same design, organizations, people, technology, requirements, and procedures) you'd expect it to cost the same. But
this scenario never exists. The RDT&E cost models of Sec. 20.3 assume a relatively
new design but proven technology. The more new technology is considered, the more
the risk that added time and effort will be required to complete the development
Program cost is a nebulous quantity, heavily impacted by tecbnological maturity, pr0grammatic considerations, "normal" schedule slips, and other unforeseen events. Cost
estimates derived from the CERs should therefore be accompanied by a cost-risk
assessment to estimate potential effects of a level of complexity below or beyond
average.
Cost-Risk Analysis provides an assessment of the ability of projected funding
profile to assure that a program can be completed and meet its stated objectives.
Although technical risks are often one of the biggest cost drivers for space systems,
many cost-engineering processes and models ignore effects of cost risk in the interest
of quick-turnaround estimates. Cost-risk analysis is important because single-point
cost estimates, while meeting the top-level needs of budgetary planners, often do not
meet the needs of those who want to perform more detailed trade-offs between cost
and performance (see Book [1993}). The purpose of cost-risk analysis is threefold:
1. Translate qualitative risk assessments into quantitative cost impacts
2.

Assist program managers in managing risk

3. Establish an empirical basis for estimating future programs with confidence

Proton SL·13

20,900

55-75

KosmosC-1

2.6-3.6

1,400

11

7.9
1.9-3.9

Soyuz

7,000

13-27

Tsyklon

3,600

11-16

Zenlt2

3.1-4.4

13,740

38-50

2.8-3.6

H-2

10,500

J-1

160-205

15.2-19.5

900

JAPAN
4,000

Other Topics

n

Atlas II

2,200

55-60

61.1-66.7
GTO - Geosynchronous Transfer Orbit; GEO = Geostationary Orbit; LEO = Low-Earth Orbit
• There
have
no~::rft:e for a Spaoo Shuttle launch. FoDowing the Challenger loss, only government payloads
strongly o~ the fflgh! :.GAO has assigned a price of $400 mHHon per fflght, but the actual cost depends

.!

20.4

This section describes a method of assessing the uncertainty in cost estimates. This
includes identifying the sources of uncertainty, combining them to arrive at a program
level cost uncertainty, and interpreting the results. Cost-risk analysis view!! each cost
element as an uncertain quantity that has a probability distribution and attempts to
evaluate technical, programmatic, and schedule risks in quantitative terms. Qualitative
measures of risks are then translated into cost-estimate adjustments. A key to making
quick, consistent, and defensible assessments is reducing SUbjectivity by making
assumptions about sources and magnitude of cost risk. The major sources of cost
uncertainty we consider here are:
• Cost-estimating uncertainty as quantified by the standard error, SE
• Cost growth due to unforeseen technical difficulties
Examples of risk drivers include beyond state-of-the-art technology (e.g. cooling,
processing, survivability, power,laser communications), unusual production require-

Cost ModeJing

20.4

20.4

ments (e.g. lm:ge quantities. toxic ma~al~)•. ~ght sched~es (e.g. undeveloped
technology. software development. supplier VIability). system mtegration (e.g. multicontractor teams, system testing), and unforeseen events (e.g. launch slip need ftor
~~
,
The objective is to quantify the sum of the contribution of these uncertainties to the
over:aD system or program costs. We will use the nwst likely estimates (MLE), the sum
?btained from the cost models and derive probability distributions that contain the
unpact of technology uncertainty and the uncertainty of the cost estimates. Costestimating uncertainty is quantified by computing the standard error (SE). For
development of space-system hardware, CERs usually have SE between 30% and
50%. Cost-estimating uncertainty is therefore quantified by a distribution that has a
mean (the estimate, C), and a variance (square of the SE). '"
Cost risk due to technical difficulties is estimated using the technology readiness
level (TRL), shown in Table 20-15, a NASA classification scheme for the level of
Jechnology development (the inherent development risk). A TRL of 1 or 2 represents
a situation of relatively high risk. TRLs of 3, 4 and 5 represent moderate risks and 6
throu~ 8.are low-risk categories. Based upon related experience, the sugges~ cost
uncertainties are also presented in Table 20-15. Thus, a low developmental risk subsystem would have a one standard deviation uncertainty of less than 10% about the
most likely e s t i m a t e . .
'

r

804

TABLE 20-15.

Technology Classification and Relative Cost Risk. Definitions are from

NASA.
Standard
Technology
Readiness
Level
1

Deviation
Definition
Basic principles observed

Relative
Risk Level

aboutMLE
(%)

High

>25

High

>25

Moderate

20-25

Critical function/characteristic demonstrated

Moderate

15-20

Component or breadboard tested in relevant
environment

Moderate

10-15

Prototype/engineering model tested In relevant
environment

Low

< 10

7

Engineering model tested In space

Low

<10

8

Full operational capabilitY

Low

<10

2

Conceptual design formulated

3

Conceptual design tested analytically or
experimentally

4
5

6

Other adjustment factors correct for uncertainty in the deve~opment status of a
ific technology. The technological risk re~ated to dev~loFg a ~ace .sys~m
nds on how we use the technology and ~n Its degree of ~ght ~catlon. If
an~em has already flown in space, it's more likely to work agam, so It represents less
risk to the user.
. .
. .
To the technology-based risk, we need to add the contribution o~ cost estunating
uncertainty in a probabilistic faShion. Since the technology uncertamty s:~ :e c~st
timating uncertainties are independent (uncorrelated), these may be com m usmg
: tandard square root of the sum of the squares. (See standard probability texts.) For
e:a:nple, suppose a subsystem TFU ~is $5 million. ~e ~k level is modera~ with
a 20% standard deviation in uncertainty and the cost estimating standard error. IS ~­
sumed to be 15%. The standard error for the sum of the two somces of uncertainty IS

s

the root sum square

(u? + ue2)lfl =(0.22 + O.152)lfl =0.25

(20-1)

(1, is the cost standard deviation in technology and ue is the cost estimating
c~ty. Thus the uncertainty standard deviation is 25% of the MLE for the sub-

where

:stem. The input to the above equation will be ob.tained .from Table 20-~5 for the ut
and from Tables 20-4, 20-5, and 20-6 for the UC' This proVIdes the uncertainty measure
for a subsystem.
.
For an entire system, the probability sum is more complex. We cannot ~lUlply use
the root sum square since there are correlations between subsystems. That I~, mterrelationships exist between the development of s~systems. To capture these m~m:la­
tionships requires more advan~ methods th~ will be treated here. An approxtmation
to computing the system uncertamty measure IS:
1. Sum the uncertainty standard deviations for each subsystem. This provides a
system uncertainty assuming perfect correlation among subsystems.
2. Take the root sum square of the subsystem uncertainty standard deviations.
This provides a completely uncorrelated solution.
3. Take the average of the two values in steps (1) ~d (2~. This provides an intermediate solution which is a reasonable approXImation for most conceptual
analyses.
An example of this process for FireSat is shown in Table 20-22 in Sec. 20.5.
Fig. 20-4 in that section sho:ws the ~c!»al sha~ of the probability distribution, based
on the assumption of GaussIan statistics. The mte~~ area under ~~ curve up to a
given cost estimate value XE on the horizontal ~s YIelds the probability,.P, ~at the
actual system cost will lie at or below the XE estimated value. The curve IS gIven by
the Gaussian distribution:

J

x
P(XE ) =

• The terminology here can cause confusion. Cost models use the terms most likely estimate,
MLE, and sto;uJord error, SE, because the statistical data in the CERs is not truly Gaussian.
However, usmg a Gaussian probability distribution is often convenient for analyzing errors.
Consequently, t?mughout this section ,,:,e will use MLE from the CERs interchangeably with
the mean or estimated cost, C, and SE mterchangeably with the standard deviation c:r even
~u~ ~eans and standard deviations are applicable only if the statistical data has a Ga~sian
distribution.

805

Other TopiCS

F(x)dx, O<P(XE )<1

(X-C)2

-~

t-

F(x) = e.,f2i
, IF(x)dx=1
2nu
Here, C is the estimated cost and

U

--

is the standard deviation of the estimate.

(20-2)

806

Cost Modeling

2M

The above
analysis assumes normal
uall
th
.
. distributions for the uncertain·ti·es. This·IS not
us y ~ case. but does proVide sunple analytical solutions. A comprehensive
m~thod USIng Monte Carlo simulation is treated by Wong and Sheldon [1986] and
Dlen~mann P%6]. The treatment of cost/reliability relationships (that is the risk
assOCIated With the failure of flight units) is discussed in Sec. 19.2 and by Gupta and
Altshuler [1989]. A more comprehensive treatment of analytical methods and th
meth?rl of mo~ents to a~ss cos~ risk, as well as Monte Carlo simulation methOO:
mentioned earlIer, are given by Wilder [1978], Abramson and Young [1990], Book
[~993], Burgess.and Gobrieal [1996], and Young [1992). The end product of costnsk ass~sment In this framework is a total spacecraft cost-probability distribution.
from which th~ mean. standard deviation. percentiles, and other descriptive statistics
can be ~etenmned. (See Fig. 20-4 for an example cost estimate probability density
evaluation.)
20.4.2 Time Spreading of Costs

Prior sec~ons have focused upon developing total cost estimates. We now address
how costs will be spread over time. The following analytical cost spreadin method
was developed by Wynholds and Skratt [1977] and approximates the expe~ence of
actual programs.
~e spreading of the costs to determine funding profIles can be approximated by a
function of the form:
F(S)

=A [10 + S «15 - 4S)S - 20)]S2 + B [10 + S (6S
+ [1 - (A + B)](5 - 4S)S4

- 15)]5'3

(20-3)

where F(S) is the fraction of cost consumed in time S, S is the fraction of the total time
elapsed. and A and B are empirical coefficients.
~ values f?C the coefficients A and B depend on the expected loading of costs
over time. For Instance, a typical period for RDT&E and two production units .
5 years. The costs are usually heavier during the first 2 years when design devel;
ment and testing occur. ~ically, 60% .of the costs will be incurred by th~ midpoint
of the schedule. The coeffiCients for vanous spending splits are:

·!

% Expenditure
at schednle midpoint
80

60
50
40

20

Coefficients in Eq. (20-3)
A
B
0.96
0.04
0.32
0.68
o
1.00
o
0.68
o
0.04

A ~% distribution is suggested for the RDT&E and production of the fIrst several
satellites. If ~ore than tw'? satellites are included. the 60% decreases toward a limit of
50%. A SpecifIc example IS provided in Sec. 20.5.
Another sc~edul~-related i~ue that we may address is present value, which is based
upon the con~lderation. of the time value of money. One dollar in 2000 is worth more
~ a d~llar In 2~5, SInce the 2000 dollar could be invested and earn a return so that
Its value In 2005 IS more
than one dollar (in constant 2000 dollars). This value Increase
.
..
would occur even Without inflation.

807

Other Topics

20.4

To illustrate the present value concept, consider a cost comparison of two projects.
Both projects have satisfIed all technical requirements. Project A has a three year
development consisting of funding requirements of $10 million, $5 million, and
$1 million in constant 2000 dollars. Project B has a funding profIle of $1 million.
$5 million, and $10 million in 2000 dollars. Thus, the totals are the same for both.
However, the buyer of this project, government or otherwise, will prefer the second
project on an economic basis since it will expend most of the funds in the future rather
than the near term. The buyer of Project B could invest the $9 million excess funds in
the first year and have additional funds at the end of the project. The conv~ti~ way
of handling a comparison is to compute the present value for both projects usmg a
discount rate. The discount rate is the time value of money. The appropriate disco~t
rate is controversial. If possible, treat the disco~t rate as a parameter and .determIne
at what point, if any, there is a crossover in the discount rate where one project would
be preferred over another. A 10% rate is a standard value for study purposes.
The present value, PV, is obtained by multiplying the funding for each year by the
factor:
PV=

1
(l+dt

(20-4)

1

where n is the year of project (relative to the constant dollar year), and d is the discount
rate.
For project A, the present value at a 10% discount rate is
PYA

=10/(1 + 0.1)0 + 51(1 + 0.1)1 + 1/(1 + 0.1)2 =15.4 in $ Millions

For project B, the present value is
PVB

=1/(1 + 0.1)0 + 5/(1 + 0.1)1 + 10/(1 + 0.1)2 =13.8 in $ Millions

Thus, project B is less expensive than project A by $1.6 million or roughly 10% in
present value terms.

ZO.4.3 Rough Order-of-Magnitnde Cost Estimates
As concepts are developed. it is helpful to have an ~timate of the anticipated c~ts.
By making "sanity" estimates, we can develop some Idea of cost bounds.for vanous
concepts. Table 20-16 gives.estimated costs in constant 2000 dollars. These should be
used to give rough order of magnitude costs for missions un~er ~onsi~on.
For example, we can estimate the cost of four commumcation satellites (TORSclass). two in each of two orbit planes with launches from both ~ Eastern and
Western Test Ranges using two Titan IV/Centaurs. Table 20-16 proVides an order-ofmagnitude cost of:

Satellites: 4 x $126M

$504 million

and Table 20-14 provides an order of magnitude cost of:
Launches: 2 x $333M
Total

~ million

$1,170 million

808

CostModeJiug

TABLE 20-16.

20.4

Space Systems Costs. This table can be used to obtain quick oro
magnitude estimates. All values are in FYOO$M.
er-ot.

Manned Space Programs

Total Program Costs($M)

ApoUo

152,000

Orbiter

4,400

Skylab

3,100

Mercury

1,100

Space ObservatOries

Total Program Costs

Space Telescope

2,270

GRO

640

HETE

31

Sampex

75
Dry Weight
(kg)

Average
Unit Costs ($M)

$Klkg

Intelsal VIII (commercial)

1,200

133

TDRSS (NASA)

1,550

126

81

806
500

114

141

78

156

33

11

333

2,200

314

143

839

57

68

DSCS IIIB (000)
Westar (commercial)
ORBCOMM

111

SurvelllancelNavlgation Satellites
DSP
GPS-2

A rule-of-thumb for satellite development costs is that RDT&E (nomecurring)
costs are 2 to 3 times the unit costs (for high-tech programs, factors of 5 to 6 are used).
Adding development costs of 25 times unit satellite costs brings the total costs to
around $1.5 billion. Such quick computations can also be used as a cross check for
estimates obtained from the cost models of Sec. 20.3.
20.4.4 Learning Curve
Historically. the majority of satellites built and flown have been one-of-a-kind systems. However with the prolifemtion of constellations where recurring costs and learning rates dominate the cost equation, a breakout of developmental and theoretical first
unit costs is necessary.
We can adjust the single-spacecraft CERs to correct for cost reduction from
learning how to do the job better or the effects of changing technological status. CERs
effectively predict costs for developing a prototype or first production unit, often
called the theoretical first unit. but they poorly estimate the cost for even the most
modest production line. The staff who manufactures a second or third similar
spacecraft will learn to do the job better and use economies of scale. which quantifiably improve performance. The learning mte for the space and the aerospace industry
is such that. on avemge, the Nth unit will cost between 87% and 96% of the previous
unit.
The learning curve is a mathematical technique to account for productivity
improvements as a larger number of units are produced. It includes all cost reductions
between the first production unit and subsequent units. This includes cost reductions
due to economies of scale. set up time, and human learning as the nlimber of units
increase. The total production cost for N units is modeled as:
Production cost = TFU xL

DMSP

B == 1- In«I00%) I S)
500
514

84

Pioneer (SIC bus only)
Clementine

88

171

231

38

165

1,018

n

232

57

76
246

Experimental Small Satellites

RADCAL

92

5

PoSAT-1

54

49
84

12

24

1

12

214

19

89

60

15

243

AMSATAQ-13
Freja

0rsted

In2

168

Interplanetary Spacecraft

Mars Obsarver

(20-5)

where

Meteorological Satellites
GOES

809

45,000

Gemini

Communication Satellites

Other Topics

20.4

TFU is the theoretical first unit cost, L is the learning curve factor, and S is the learn-

ing curve slope in percent. This form of the learning curve was chosen because of its
fit to empirical data, based on the theory ofT.P. Wright [1936].
The learning curve slope S represents the percentage reduction in cumulative
average cost when the number of production units is doubled. The learning curve slope
S sets the value of B. For example: if S =95% and the first unit costs $1 million. then
doubling the number to 2 units reduces the average cost of both to 95% of the first unit.
Thus, the two units cost $1.9 million. The second unit cost is $0.9 million. The learning curve exponent B is 0.926 for S =95%.
For less than 10 units, we recommend a 95% learning curve slope be applied.
Between 10 and 50 units, a 90% learning curve and 85% for over 50 units is appropriate. These will vary with the application and how the manufacturing and assembly
activities are set up. The cost models presented earlier provide first unit costs so that
total production costs are determined by multiplying 1FU costs by the learning curve
factor.

.

1

810

Cost ModeHng

2005

The following example table illustrates the impact of a 95% learning curve on unit
costs. The unit or marginal cost is the difference in production cost between N units
and N - 1 units. Fot example, the cost of the fifth unit is the difference in production
cost between the fourth and fifth units, that is, 4.44 - 3.61 =0.83.
i

Unit
Number
1
2
3
4
5

Eifeet ora 95% Learning Curve
Productiou
Average
Cost tI'FU x L)
Cost
1.00
1.00
1.90
0.95
2.77
0.92
3.61
0.90
4.44
0.89

FireSat Example

20.5
TAB LE 20-17.

FYOO$K.satellite
Cost estimates
F1reSat Space and Launeh Segment Costs
• Intracfdlonal
designs.based
Input
on data In Table 20-3 Tables 20-4 and 20-5 ,or
data fiom Tables 10-31 and 20-3.

Cost

Component

Unit
Cost
1.00
0.90
0.87
0.84
0.83

20.5 FireSat Example

John T. Collins, Microcosm, Inc.
We will apply the above cost models to the FueSat example to compute Jife-cycJe
cost estimates for the entire mission. We assume that two satellites are needed initially
and that both are launched into a 150-km orbit by a Pegasus XL launch vehicle. The
WBS consists of the space, launch, and ground segments. The space element consists
of two satellites with infrared sensor payloads. The launch segment is two vehicles.
The ground segment will consist of a single ground control station. All of the necessary data is given in Table 20-3.
To illustrate the use of the CERs in Tables 20-4, 20-5, and 20-6, the cost estimates
will be developed to the spacecraft subsystem level. The weight, beginning of life
power, sensor aperture diameter, and other technical characteristics are the key parameters for the estimate. The specific v.alues are in Tables 20-17 and 20-18. The
hardware RDT&E cost is based upon the CERs of Table 20-4 and 20-6 (nonrecurring portion) modified by the design status factors listed at the bottom of Table 20-8.
The production costs are the result of the TFU CERs of Table 20-5 and 20-6 (recurring portion) multiplied by a learning curve factor L =1.9 for two units. The computation of L is described in Sec. 20.4.4. The subsequent or second unit cost is then
the difference between the production cost of two units and the TFU. The results for
the large satellite cost model (based largely on USCM 7.0) indicate the IR payload
contributes most to overall system cost. Thus, the payload sensor should dominate
attempts to reduce cost
Program-level costs are added based on the CERs in Tables 20-4, 20-5, and 20-6.
Ground support equipment costs are then computed from Tables 20-4 and 20-6 based
on RDT&E and first unit hardware costs. The launch operations and orbital support
costs are obtained from Table 20-5 and 20-6. Fmally, the satellite software costs are
based upon Table 20-10 using Ada. This yields a total space segment cost of $549M
using the USCM 7.0 model and $44M using the smallsat model. The large discrepancy
in total space segment cost is due largely to the vast difference in cost between the pay_
load cost estimates for each model. The large satellite cost model yields an estimate of

811

RDT&E 1slUnH 2ndUnH
To1aI
Parameter, Value, Data
Cost
Cost
Cost
Cost
Source
(FYOO$K) (FYOO$K) (FYOO$K) (FYOO$K)

SE

($K)

1. Payload
1.1 IR Sensor

aperture dla. = 0.263 m

168,462

67,386

60,647

296,495

94,265
1,368

2. Spacecrall bus
2.1 Structure"

wl =32.0 kg

2,764

419

m

3,580

22 Thermal·

wl =6.8 kg

l,3'S1

197

1n

1,712

830

2 3 Electrical Power
• System (EPS)·

wl

2,862

2,067

1,860

6,790

3,360

2.4 TeJemetry Trecklng
& Command and Data
HandDng (TT&C/DH)*

wl=6.8 kg

2,356

1,894

1,705

5,955

2,819

wl = 18.3 kg

5.753

2,799

2,519

11,071

4,570

"2.5 AtIIIUde Delemlnatlon
& Con1rol Sys.
(ADCS)*

c

45.7kg

NAt

2.6 Propulsion

SpacecraI! Bus Total Cost
3. Integration, Assembly
& Test (IA&T)

Spacecraft bus +
payload RDT&E cost"

15,092

7,:rl6

6,639

29,107

9.739

40,453

1,456

1,310

43,220

19,826

25,494

22,944

100,888

37,773

22,184

7.543

1,303

547

$183,554
4. Program Level

Same as previous

52,450

5. Ground Support
Equipment (GSE)

Same as previous

22,184

6. Launch & Orbital
Cps Support (LOOS)

Spacecraft + payload
wl=14Okg

26KLOC

7. Right Software
Total Space Segment
Cost 10 Contractor

686

617

5,655*

0

0

5.655

304,297

102,398

~158

498,853

10"10 Contractor Fee

30,430

10,240

9,216

49,885

Total Space Segment
Cost to Govemmant

334,727

112,638

101,:rl4

548,738

13,000

13,000

26,000

8. Launch Segment

2 Pegasus XL
Launchers

Total Cost of Deployment

Spacecraft
bus subsystem
t• FlreSaJ
propulsion
system

a::: ~'= ~~ ~

taken~

massBSls

k=

574,738 136,947

mass

18.3

of 112 kg.
for ADCS mass

(Le, moderete modIIIcatIons to existing flight software). caJcula1ed
lncIudas propulsion
0.
mass.
*Assumas
a heritagesystemfaclorhardwar8of
cost
5.

using flight software CER In Table 20-10.

in

• costs.tior the m.
. frared
sensor while
the
$296M for RDT&E, first unit, and second umt
c difference
ayload
small satellite model yields a t?tal cost ~f $6.~M. This ~:te cost-estima~g relaa load cost estimacost estimates illustrates the difficulty m finding an appropn
tionship for some classes of spacecraft payloads. For this reason,alP Y based methods
ti . .m
cases best achieved by using bottoms-up or an ogyon ISth many tri The difference in these numbers is attributable to ~unt
rather an parame CS.
hich the CERs are based mcluding:

~::=v~ ;:t:::S:P;~~~~ :~e;tance, operational vs. demonstration

11
Cost ModeHng

812
TABLE 20-18.

2O.s

FIreSat Space and Launch Segment Costs In FYOO$K. Based on data In
Table 20-3, Small SatelDte CERs In Table 20-6 and ratios for other cost compo.
nents In Table 20-9.

Cost

Parameter, VaIue,Data

Component

Source

RDT&E 1st Unit 2nd Unit
To1aJ
Cost
Cost
Cost
Cost
(FYOO$K) (FYOO$K) (FYOO$K) (FYOO$K)

BE

.

tal perations and maintenance cost of $6MIyear in

·th Table 20-12 to estimate a t? o.
ed' Table 20-21 to
~~ble 20-19. Fmally, all costs, mcluding a 10% fee, are summ m
yield a total cost plus fee of $671M in FYOO dollars.
TABLE 20-19.

FJreSat Annual Operations and MaIntenance Cost In FYOO$M.

($K)

Operations and MaIntenance

Spacecraft total cost
(RDT&E + TFU)

3.049

2.033

1.829

6.911

1.946

2.1 Structure'

wi. =32.0 kg

1.316

565

508

2,390

1.393

2.2Thermar

wi. = 6.6 kg.

221

221

199

642

173

2.3 ElectrIcal Power
System (EPS)'

wi. =45.7 kg

3,271

2.005

1.804

7.060

1,221

2.4a Telemetry Tracking TT&C + DH wi. =6.8 kg
& Command (TT&C)'

641

262

235

1.138

793

TT&C + DH WI. =6.8 kg

868

355

319

1.542

1.0n

SoftWare 100 KLOC (Ada) @ $2201LOC

wi. = 9.1 kg.

767

1.306

1.175

3,247

1.744

Equipment

1. Payload
2. Spacecraft bus

2.4b Command & Data
Handffng (c&DH)'
2.5 AttItude Datermlnallon
& Control Sys.
2.6 PropulsIon

408

1.314

450

5.166

4.649

17,353

4.883

-

1.766

1,589

3,355

945

Same as previous

1.455

1.455

1.309

4,218

1.188

5. Ground Support
EquIpment (GSE)

Same as previous

838

-

-

838

238

8. launch & Orbftal
Cps Support (LOOS)

Same as previous

-

n5

697

1.472

415

7.538
Spacecraft total cost
(RDT&E + TFU)

4. Program level

Spacecraft Bus Total Cost

26KlOC

Total Space Segment
Cost to Contractor

5.655t

0

0

5.655

18.535

11.194

10.074

39.803

1.854

1.119

1.007

3.960

20.389

12.313

11.082

43.783

13.000

13.000

26.000

2 Pegasus XL
laUnchers

Subtotal
Management

Systems Engineering
Product Assurance
Integration and Test

Total

10% Contractor Fee

Total Cost of Deployment

FlreSat Ground Segment and Operations Costs In FYOO$M.

logistics

Tolal Space Segment
Cost 10 Govemment
8. launch Segment

6

Development

453

7. FllghtSoftware

4.4

FacHities
Salelnte bus dIy mass =
112kg

Cost
22.0
17.8

W
43.8

4.0
6.6
3.3

5.3

a..a
66.3

TABLE 20-21.

FlreSat Ufe-Cycle Cost estimate. AU costs In FYOO$M, including fee. Launch
segment estimate Is based on two Pegasus launches.
Initial Deployment

Space Segment - Table 20-17
Launch Segment - Table 20-17

69.783

1.6

Total Annual Cost

TABLE 20.20.

453

3. Integration. Assembly
& Test (IA&T)

10 Contractor Personnel ($160KlYr) Including fee
Maintenance

(AOCS)'

813

FireSat Example

20,5

7.552

, Spacecraft bus subsystem masses shown Include a fraction of the spacecraft mass margin of 11.2 kg.
t Assumes a heritage cost factor of 0.5 (I.e.. moderate modlflcatlons 10 existing tnght software). Calculated
using flight software CER In Thble 20-10.

Ivalidation, and programmatic oversight and required documentation. From Table
20-14 the launch vehicle cost for 2 Pegasus systems is $26M, giving a total cost to deployment of $575M and $70M for large and sma11sat models, respectively.
Table 20-20 gives the ground segment development and operations costs for
FrreSat. We begin with the ground software cost for 100 ~OC of Ada code and use
Tables 20-10 and 20-11 to compute the development cost. Our initial assumptions of
a 7-year life after ICC (5-year spacecraft life) and 10 contractor personnel lire used

Ground Segment· Table 20-20
Subtotal

548.7

26.0
66.3
641.0

Operations and MaIntenance' (Table 20-19)

Annual Cps. and Ma\nI.
Total Ops. and Malnt. for 5 years
Total Ufe-Cycte Cost for 5 years

6.0
30.0
671.0

.
.'
the cost uncertainty in our estimate for the hardware using the
Let us now assess
11' hard
nsists of the
technique of SeC.20.4.1. For the FlreSat example, the sate lte
ware co

814

CostModeDng

20.5

spacecraft bus and an IR payload with CERs for the 1FU from Table 20-5 and
Table 20-6. The spacecraft bus is assumed to consist of proven technology with a TRL
of 6. Some new component designs are necessary, but the technologies have had
applications where engineering models were successfully tested. The IR payload
requires infusion of new technology and is assigned a TRL of 5. The spacecraft dry
weight (including payload) is 140 kg and the IR payload aperture diameter is 0.26 In.
Using the corresponding CERs from Table 20-5 to compute costs and the risk methodology we arrive at the results in Table 20-22.
.
TABLE 20-22-

FJreSat Cost Uncertainty

TFU
Element

($M)

System
Technology
LeYel

S/Cbus

Cost

System
Technology
SId. Dey.
($M)

Combined
SId. Dey.
($M)

7.4

6(= 10%)

0.74

1.11

1.33

67.4

5(= 15%)

10.1

10.1

14.3

Total

74.8

Step 1: Sum

15.6

Step2:RSS

14.4

Step 3: Average

15.0

The standard deviation for the system technology is obtained by using Table 20-15.
For example, the $O.74M standard deviation for the spacecraft system technology is
10% of the $7.4M cost The cost estimate standard deviation is assumed to be 15% and
the combined standard deviation is the root sum square (RSS) of the two components.
Thus, the standard deviation of the total satellite hardware cost ($74.8M) is
$15 million or 20%.
The cost to build two FrreSat satellites is $194.5 million (see Table 20-17). Assuming this is ~d over 5 years with 60% of the costs to be incurred in 2-112 years, then
the coeffiCIents would be A = 032 and B = 0.68. Inserting these into the equation for
F (S) [Eq.20-30], we obtain the distribution in Table 20-23 for satellite recurring
costs.
TIme DIstrlbuUon of FJreSat Costs. Based on a totaJ recurring cost for the first
two units of $194.5M (Table 20-17) and assuming 60".4 of costs spent In the first

2.5 years.

Cumulative Cost
(%)

1

12.3

23.9

12.3

23.9

2

42.8

832

30.5

59.3

(%)

($M)

3

75.6

147

32.8

63.8

4

95.8

186.3

20.2

39.3

5

100.0

194.5

Totals

(Payload not· accounIed for In either estbnaIe)

sman SaleIII!e Cool Model E _
Space SegmenI Cool for 2 Spal:ecmII
(IncIJJdIng Lminch) = $62.181 +/- 6,401 K

I

l.aJge SaleIII!e Cost Madel ~
Space SegmenI Cost for 2 Spaoeemll
Vncluding Launch) =$90,595+1-15, 159 K

I
10,~

20.000 30,000 40.000 50.000 60,000 70.000 60,000 90.000 100.000 110.000 120.000 130.000 140,000 150,000

EsIIma1ed Cost (FYOO$K)

Rg.2G-4. Probability Density of Estimated Cost ResuHlng from Cost RIsk Analysis. The
taller narrower curve to the left Is the result for the small satellite CERs from Table
20-6 'and the wider, lower curve is the result for the large ~tellite CERs from Tables
20-4 and 20-5. Most missions of similar scope to FireSat WID lie somewhere between
these two extremes. The results of such statistical evaluations can be used to dictate
reserVes policy (e.g., "risk" donars) or to guide technology Investment

Annual Cost

Vear

($M)

Figure 20-4 displays cost estimate probability density for spacecraft bus RDT&E,
firSt unit, second unit, wrap costs (IA&T, program level, GSE, and LOOS), l:mnc~
cost, flight software cost, and contractor fee for the two cost models presented 111 this
h ter All costs are represented for the space and launch segment, except payload
c ar(d~ to the large discrepancy in payload cost estimate between the two models).
~ results illustrate the difference between these two models. and also,. where
. tes derived from these two models are most likely to fall. The smail satelhte cost
::~ yields a best estimate of $62,181K and a s~dard deviation. of $6,:401K. The
1 e satellite cost model result, depicted by the WIder curve at the nght, YIelds a best
e:mate of $90,595K and a standard deviation of $15,159K.

Cost
Estimate
SId. Dey.
($M)

IRpayload

TABLE 20-23.

815

FireSat Example

20.5

42

82

100.0

194.5

20.5.1 FireSat Design Life Study
Using an integrated design-to-cost tool that uses design relationships. prevlo~ly
presented and the small-satellite ~ found in T~ble 20-6, a tJade ~a1ysl~ of d~gn
life was performed. The primary drivers for mass mcrease as a function of mcreasmg
design life are:
1. The requirement for additional propellant for on-orbit station keeping;
2. A need for more capable subsystems, for example the power subsystem where
solar cell and battery degradation requires oversizing the system to meet a
. new higher beginning-of-Iife power requirement; and
3. Full redundancy assumed for 7-year lifetime.

816

Cost Modeling

20.5

We chose mass-based CERs and assume that payload requirements and perfor~ance p~ters such as pointing accuracy, downlink data rate, data storage, and
SIZe remam fixed. The results are shown in tabular form in Table 20-24. Mass-based
CERs are favored over the performance-based CERs.
TABLE 20-24.

FlreSat Mass, Power and Cost as a FuncUon of Design life. Data assumes
fixed performance requirements. Redundancy and associated Impacts to subsystem masses, and increased power and propellant requirements drive the

results.
Design life (years)

1

3

5'

7

20

24

30

35

Propulsion (kg)

7

8

9

18

ADCS(kg)

7

9

9

22

Payload (kg)

TT&c/C&DH (kg)

5

6

7

20

Thermal (kg)

5

6

7

9

Power (kg)

33

40

46

70

Structures (kg)

22

27

32

37

FlreSat Design Life Trade

35

37

Launch Mass (kg)

130

153

175

248

0

Perlormance Pegasus (kg)

290

290

290

290

211

Launch Marglnt

55%

47%

40"10

14%

EOL Power (W)

140

140

140

140

BOL Power (W)

145

157

170

183

Space Segment Cost (FYOO$M)

35

40

44

76

Launch Cost (FYOO$M)

26

26

26

36*

Operations Cost (FYOO$M)

6

18

30

45

Total Cost (FYOO$M)

67

84

100

157

Cost per Year (FYOO$M)

67

28

20

22

e .include launch mass margin relative to estimated Pegasus performance to orbit,
which IS about 290 kg to a 700 km circular orbit at 55 deg inclination. Spacecraft power estimates, used only as intermediate results, demonstrate required growth in the
power subsystem as a function of lifetime. Our required propellant mass increases as
well. When the margin goes negative we are· forced to launch Frresat on the more
capable Athena 1 (costs $18M compared with the $13M Pegasus XL). Operations
costs are not changed from our previous analysis of $6M per year.

___ Cost Per Year

.
0

70

/ /

140

33

140

,

160

31

120

80

180

Propellant (kg)

99

, RreSat baseline design.
t25% margin required at conceptual design stage
:l:Launch mass plus 25% margin exceeds payload capability of Pegasus XL lWo
Athena 1 lalmches assumed at $18M per lalmch.

yr

Aggregate cost infonnation along with cost per year is shown in Fig. 20..5. This can
be compared with the notional representation in .Fig..1-5 and we hav~ completed ~e
requirements to design to cost cycle. Information hke that shown In Fig. 20-5 IS
extremely useful for demonstrating how cost "pushes back" on .require"!ents. When
we specified a mission life of 5 years, we did not ha.ve enough mfo?"ation to know
whether this was the proper choice from a cost-effectiveness standpomt. Now that we
have completed the picture, we can see that (all factors co~side~) the. optiID:a~ lifetime for FireSat is between 4 and 6 years where the curve IS relatively msenslt1ve to
further changes in design life. This is also about the time when we would expect that
the cost-effectiveness of the IR sensor payload and other components may become an
issue. Even though amortized mission costs are lower, i.e., less dollars per year, there
is proportionally less value.

!

Spacecraft Dry Mass (kg)

817

FireSat Example

20.5

60

/

120

-- ------

100
80

'"

/

/

.., '" -

Total Cost

40

..,

30

..,

20

--- --- - - -- - - ----- -~
-Launch Cost
--- --__ • - • - - • ..:.: Operations Cost

40
20

2

3

4

5

..

6

7

as

..

~
CD
a.

-;
0

0

10
0

0
0

~

50 !!.

Space Segment Cost/"

60

~

8

Spacecraft Design LIfe (years)
FIg. 20-5. AreSat DeSign Ufe Trade. Compare with Ag. 1-5 in S~. 1.4. To~ cost, the sum 01
individual spacecraft cost, launch vehicle cost, and operatIons cost, IS sh~wn as a fun~­
tion of spacecraft design life. On the right axis we plo~ ~t per year ~hlC~ asym~toti­
cally approaches the yearly operations cost as desIgn life goes to Infinity. Op~l!1al
design life is chosen at a point on the cost-per-year curve that Is relatively insensitive
to changes in design life and while mission data still remains useful.

This analysis highlights an important role for shorter-Iiv~d sm.all satellites o~er
traditional large satellites. Since more rapid technology mfuslon may proVIde
increases in cost-performance, we should be able to take advantage of state-of-theart technology available 5-6 years from now, instead of continuing to operate aD: obsolescent system. Therefore, we choo~e to utilize two FireSat payloa~s, each ~Ith a
5-year lifetime, but expect that the second version of the satellite wIll have hIgher
performance per pound than what we designed with today'~ technology. We can
launch a satellite every 5 years to assure that we don't expenence an ~uta~e or design in extra mission life (with the mass and cost consequences shown 18 FIg. 20-5)
if the second satellite is delayed.

818

Cost Modeling

References

References

Gupta, A. K., and D. Altshuler. 1989. ''Cost Effective Reliability Determination for
Spacecraft Design." in Institute for Cost Analysis/National Estimating Society
Coriference.
.

Abramson, Robert L. and Philip H. Young. 1990. ''FRISKEM-Formal Risk Evaluation Methodology," ORSAII1MS Joint National Meeting, Philadelphia, PA,
October 29-31, 1990.

819

Hamaker, J. 1987. "A Review of Parametric Cost Modeling Activities at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center." Paper presented to the AIAA Economics Technical
Committee, Buffalo, New York.

Apgar, H. 1990. "Developing the Space Hardware Cost Mode!." Paper IAA-CESO-04
(90), AIAA Symposium on Space Systems Cost Methodologies and Applications,
May.

Hamaker, J. 1989. "NASA MSFC's Engineering Cost Model (ECM)."Proc.lntl. S<lC.
Parametric Analysts, 10th Annual Conference, Brighton.

Bearden, David A. 1999. "A Methodology for Technology-Insertion Analysis Balancing Benefit, Cost and Risk." Dissertation Paper, Department of Aerospace
Engineering, University of Southern California, August 1999.

Isakowitz, Steven J. 1995. AIAA International Reference Guide to Space Launch
Systems (2nd Edition). Washington, DC: American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics.

Bearden, David A., Richard Boudreault, and James Wertz. 1996. ''Cost Modeling:' In
Reducing Space Mission Cost. Torrance, CA, and Dordrecht, the Netherlands:
Microcosm Press and Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Management Consulting and Research, Inc. 1986. Space and Strategic Defense Cost
Analysis: Cost Analysis Techniques Report. TR-8618-2. Washington, DC: Office
of the
Secretary of Defense.

Book, S.A. 1993. "Recent Developments in Cost Risk." Space Systems Cost Analysis
Group Meeting, Palo Alto, CA, June 7-8.

MCR Federal,lnc. 1997. Communications Payload and Spacebome Electronics Cost
Model. TR-9535/1O. Arlington, VA: Air Force Cost Analysis Agency.

Book, S.A. and P.H. Young. 1995. "General-Error Regression for USCM-7 CER
Development." Presented at the Society of Cost Estimating and Analysis National
Conference, Tysons Corner, VA, 19-21 July.

National Aeronautics and Space Administration. n.d. [ea. 1981] Space Transportation
System Reimbursement Guide. Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space
Administration.

u.s.

Sadin, S.R. and R.W. Davis. 1993. "The SmaI1sat Revolution-Back to the Future?"
Paper presented at lAP, Graz, Austria. 1AP-93-U5570

Burgess, E.L. and H.S. Gobrieal.I996. "Integrating Spacecraft Design and Cost-Risk
Analysis Using NASA Technology Readiness Levels," The Aerospace Corporation. Presented at the 29th Annual DoD Cost Analysis Symposium, Leesburg, VA.
February 21-23.

Sarsfield, Liam. 1998. The Cosmos on a Shoestring: Small Spacecraft for Space and
Earth Sciences. Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corp.

Burgess, E.L., N. Y. Lao, and D.A. Bearden. 1995. "Small-Satellite Cost-Estimating
Relationships." Presented at the 9th Annual AlAAlUtah State University Conference on Small Satellites, Logan, Utah, September 18-21.

Smith, G. K., J. P. Stucker, and E. J. Simmons. 1985. Commercial and Military
Communication Satellite Acquisition Practices. RAND Report R-3121-AF. Santa
Monica, CA: The RAND Corporation.

Defense Communications Agency (DCA). 1996. Cost and Planning Factors
Manual. DCA Circular 600-60-1. Washington, DC: Defense Communications
Agency.

Space and Missile System Center, Directorate of Cost, Los Angeles AFB, CA.I994.
Unmanned Space Vehicle Cost Model, 7th ed. Los Angeles AFB, CA: Space and
Missile System Center.

Defense Information Services Agency (OISA). 1997. OISA Circular 600-60-1,
Cost and Planning Factors Manual, version 1.2, 7 May. Washington, DC:
Defense Information Services Agency.

USAF. 1998. Raw Inflation Indices (Based on OSD Raw Inflation Rates), published
by Secretary of the Air Force (SAF/FMCEE) and available on web site
www.saffm.hq.af.miI; issued 14 January 1998. Washington, DC: U.S. Air Force.

Department of Defense. 1998. Parametrics Estimating Initiative Handbook.
Dienemann, Paul. 1966. Estimating Cost Uncertainties Using Monte Carlo Techniques. Report RM-4854-PR. Santa Monica, CA: The RAND Corporation.
Fisher, Gene H. 1970. Cost Considerations in Systems Analysis. RAND Report
R-490-ASD. Santa Monica, CA: The RAND Corporation.
Greenberg, J.S. and H. Hertzfeld. 1994. Space Economics. Washington, DC:
AIAA.

Wertz, James R. and Wiley J. Larson. 1996. Reducing Space Mission Cost. Torrance,
CA: Microcosm Press and Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Wilder, J. J. 1978. An Analytical Methodfor Cost Risk Analysis (Method of Moments),
German Aerospace Corporation PDR-OP-B78-2. Bethpage, NY: Grumman Aerospace Corporation.
Wong, R. E. and D. Sheldon. 1986. "Cost/Schedule Risk Assessment of an Advanced
Communications Satellite." Paper presented at 1986 ISPA Conference, Kansas
City, Missouri~

820

Cost Modeling

Wright, T. P. 1936. ''Factors Affecting the Cost of Airplanes." Journal ofthe Aeronautical &iences. 3: 122-128.
Wynholds, H. W. and J. P. Skratt. 1977. ''Weapon System Parametric Life Cycle Cost
Analysis" in Proceedings ofthe 1977 Annual Reliability Symposium.

Chapter 21

Young, P. H. 1992. ''FRISK-Formal Risk Assessment of System Cost Estimates."
The Aerospace Corporation. Presented at the AIAA 1992 Aerospace Design Conference, February 3-6, 1992, Irvine, CA.

Limits on Mission Design
21.1 Law and Policy Considerations
Space Law; U.S. Space Policy;
Responsibility-Liability, and Insurance;
Remote Sensing; Import and Export Restrictions;
Environmental Concerns; FireSat Legal and Policy
Issues; Asteroids
21.2 Orbital Debris-A Space Hazard,
Environmental Definition; Design Considerations:
Spacecraft Hazard and SurvivabUity Analysis

21.1 Law and Policy Considerations
William B. Wirin, University of Colorado, Colorado Springs
Why Worry About Law and Policy?
Engineers accustomed to precise answers often find that legal and political issues
intrude on the space mission design process just when everything is going smoothly.
However, I hope to shed some light on potential policy "show stoppers," and more
importantly, provide some insight into legal thinking about space missions and valid,
even critical, perils in the design process.
Policy results from balancing conflicting interests, so "valid" arguments may be
rejected. Lawyers tend to give "answers" rather than an evaluation of political and
legal risks. They unfairly believe that individuals from other disciplines will not
understand and appreciate the balancing of interests. General James V. Hartinger, first
Commander of Space Command, put it succinctly, "Lawyers are asked common sense
questions so often that they begin to believe they have common sense." The mission
planner should look to lawyers to evaluate policy and legal risks for various mission
alternatives so they can be weighed along with technical factors.
Why worry about law and policy? The simple answer is that a perfect engineering
solution is useless until it can be implemented. An example is the Apstar satellite. It
was launched in July 1994 by the PRC without obtaining coordination from "owners"
of nearby communications satellites as required by the International Telegraphic
Union>(ITU) regulations. Without the required consultations the satellite would not be
permitted to transmit signals and therefore would be of little value. The result was a
flurry of activity to conclude the negotiations quickly and this was accomplished a few
months after launch. Had this been a U.S. launch it would have been postponed until
the proper authorizations were accomplished, resulting in needless expense.

821

822

Limits on Mission Design

21.1

Another example is the Shuttle mission 51C to retrieve the Palapa and Westar VI
satellites. These satellites remained in low-Earth orbit because the motors which
should have transferred them to geostationary orbit failed. Hughes and NASA engineers worked out the technical solutions in a little more than 6 weeks. The lawyers
spent more than 6 months resolving the legal questions concerning ownership, salvage
rights, insurance coverages, and release of liability between the insurance carriers
Western Union Company and the Indonesian government. Also Hughes Aircrafi
Company and NASA had to agree on technical roles, liability, and compensation
before the recovery effort began.
Without the implementing legislation in the Commercial Space Act of 1998 the
DOT was not authorized to license private organizations to Conduct space operations
which included reentry ofreusable space vehicles. This is a vital provision not only for
NASA's X-33 and X-34 programs, but for companies building commercial reusable
launch vehicles Which will need to renter the Earth's atmosphere after delivering their
payloads to orbit. Moreover the law is now clear that launch and recovery by definition
are not an export or import. The first private launch of the Conestoga downrange to
Matagorda Island off Texas required an export license in addition to other licenses.
These additions to the law make way for commercial exploitation of new space opportunities and begin to strip away some restrictions on space activity.
21.1.1 Space Law

For a multinational project such as a space station, mission designers must recognize that lawyers from some nations approach policy and legal issues differently.
England and her progeny are common law nations; all others are civil law nations. The
latter seek to establish civil codes ofIaw which in effect create all of the rules up front.
Common law nations, in contrast, see law as evolving to solve particular problems.
They look to past precedent and attempt to fashion a modem answer, while civil law
judges apply the code and leave "changes" to legislators.
. An interesting example of space law is that spacecraft have the right to pass over
the territory and air space of other nations without their consent, whereas aircraft do
not But no one has defined where space begins. The Russians proposed 100-110 km
because aircraft presently cannot fly at that altitude, and space objects bum up in the
atmosphere below it. The U.S. position is to wait to see how technology will develop
since there have been no particular problems. Equatorial nations have argued in vain
that their sovereignty goes up to -36,000 km (geostationary orbit) so they can control
access and obtain compensation from space-faring nations who use slots above their
territory.
Space missions are inherently an international activity, because space touches the
sovereign territory of every nation on Earth. We must, therefore, consider diverse
views on space issues. For example, space-faring nations may diverge from the feelings of developing nations, or Eastern and Western nations may disagree. Differences
of opinions can arise from different cultures, economic status, political imperatives,
and world view.
International law, including space law, evolves in part from treaties. including the
l!.N. Charter and U.N. resolutions plus organic documents of international organiza_
tions. It also depends on the practice of nations, as well as the writings of established
authorities. Unlike U.S. domestic law, space law has no legislature to write the rules
and no court to enforce them. Sovereign nations enter into treaties but may disregard

21.1

Law rind Policy Considerations

823

them when they no longer serve their national security needs. The U.N. may pass
resolutions, but they are not absolutely binding even when unanimous. Besides.
treaties tend to have ambiguous language. permitting a nation to pursue its best interests. An example is Article IV of the Outer Space Treaty, which says that the Moon
and other celestial bodies shall be used exclusively for "peaceful purposes." whatever
that means.
The International Court at the Hague does band-down decisions. but nations must
usually agree to have the Court hear the case. Even when they do. there is no effective
mechanism to enforce a decision. Having said all this, we must not conclude that space
law has no value. There is a body of rules and a general understanding among nations
as to what is proper and improper in space. Nevertheless, even though they may be
ambiguous and no policeman enforces them, treaties are seldom if ever ignored.
Basic Do's and Don'ts: The Outer Space Treaty of 196'7*
As the so-called Principles Treaty. this document Jays down the basic philosophy
and legal principles for outer space. In general, it says what should or should not be
done, but does not spell out how to implement a given policy. Its preamble emphasizes
that international cooperation is essential and recognizes that exploring space is in the
common interest of all mankind. It goes further to declare that exploration should
benefit all peoples. Provisions of the treaty include:
.

• All nations may scientifically investigate space. with international cooperation
encouraged.

• No nation may claim sovereignty over outer space, including the Moon and
other celestial bodies. As an illustration, Neil Armstrong claimed the Moon for
mankind (not the United States) by stating that the mission had taken "One
small step for a man. one giant leap for mankind." The American flag was
present, but not to claim new territory. as Columbus and other explorers did
when they came to the New World.
• The rules in space will follow the established principles and rules of intemationallaw and the U.N. Charter.
• No nation will place nuclear weapons or any other weapons of mass destruction in orbit around the Earth. or on the Moon, or on other celestial bodies. This
restriction does not apply to nuclear power sources. The Treaty Banning
Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere. in Outer Space and Under Water
(August 5. 1963) prohibits tests but not placement of nuclear devices in space.
• Nations must use the Moon and other celestial bodies exclusively for ''peaceful
purposes." but they may use military personnel in scientific research. The U.S.
defines peaceful as "non-aggressive." thus permitting defensive measures.
• Astronauts are envoys of mankind. So long as they conform to accepted rules
of activity in space. they have a form of immunity. Therefore. we must return
them to their home nation promptly, and implicitly, may not charge to rescue
them. The Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts. the Return of Astronauts.
• The classic treatise on space policy is by Professor Carl Q. Christol, The Modem International
Law of.Outer Space, Pergamon Press. New York (1982). Other m~terial is ~ the annual
reports of the Colloquium on the Law of Outer Space, by the International Institute of Space
Law, publisbed by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. Washington. DC.

I~.

824

Limits on Mission Design

21.1

and the Return of Objects Launched into Outer Space (April 22, 1968) could
also apply.
• Recovered space objects must go back to the launching nation at its request
and expense.
• Nations bear international responsibility for their activities in outer space,
whether done by governmental agencies or private citizens. Thus, the U.S.
must authorize and continuously supervise all space activities of its citizens.
This requirement is unique to space activities, resulting from a compromise
between the U.S. and the former USSR. The USSR had insisted that only
governments should be permitted to go into space, whereas the U.S. insisted
on permission for private entrepreneurs. The Commercial Launch Act of 1984
was enacted partly to carry out the U.S. obligations under the 1967 Outer
Space Treaty. It has been amended from time to time to update policies and
procedures.
• Launching nations are liable for damages to citizens of other nations caused by
national and private launch activities. The Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects (March 29, 1972) could also apply.
• Nations must maintain a register of their launches. The purpose is to establish
ownership, jurisdiction, and control over the spacecraft and its personnel. In
essence. a U.S. spacecraft or space station is its sovereign territory. Other
nations retain jurisdiction over their spacecraft and modules even when
attached to another's station. Space debris falls in the same category. making
clean-up politically difficult. Launches are also reported to the U.N. to provide
an opportunity for the world community to learn about space activity. If a satellite or other space object were not registered, it would be considered a rogue
and likely forfeit any legitimate status and protection under the Outer Space
Treaty or international law . It would be awkward to put in a claim for damage
to such a satellite under the liability convention. A nation that chooses for any
reason not to play by the rules. cannot easily demand their enforcement. Of
course, policy and politics would also restrain it from complaining.
• The Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space
(January 4, 1975) requires a launching nation to advise the U.N. Secretary
General of the following: name of the launching nation, description or registration number, date and location of launch, basic orbital parameters (nodal
period, inclination, apogee. and perigee) and general function of the space
object. A nation need not update this information but may do so if it wishes.
• Nations must conduct space activities so as to avoid harming or contaminating
the environment. Project West Ford influenced this provision. In 1963. the
U.S. placed 480 million copper dipoles into orbit 2,000 miles above the Earth
in an attempt to create an artificial ionosphere to enable radio messages to
bounce from coast to coast. The in-honse name for the project was Needles.
which was an unfortunate choice. Complaints came from astronomers who
were convinced the belt of copper needles would ruin their view of the universe. They also thought it might lead to worse experiments. The Soviets said,
''What if one of the needles pierces the heart of a cosmonaut or puts out someone's eye when it reenters the atmosphere?" Although these objections were

21.1

Law and PoHcy Considerations

825

not reasonable, public ignorance made them real. Simply put, even though the
project caused no significant problems. the planners had failed to Consider
fully the effects of adverse public opinion. A key question you won't find written anywhere is, "Does it pass the common sense test?" Project West Ford
failed. Space law now requires that if a project might cause harm or interference with others, international consultations must occur before it proceeds (see
Sec. 21.1.6 on Environmental Concerns). Planners should also review the
Convention on the Prohibition of Military or any Other Hostile Use of
Environmental Modification Techniques (May 18. 1977) if they anticipate
large-scale effects.
Nuclear reactors in space create an environmental concern because they cause
gamma-ray interference with some scientific satellites. NASA's Solar Maximum Mission is a case in point; its gamma-ray spectrometer suffered interference from reactors on Soviet radar satellites for ocean reconnaissance
(RORSATs). If we plan a project such as the Gamma Ray Observatory, we
must evaluate precautions and risks. At the same time. if we plan to use a
nuclear power source for a mission. we must consider possible effects and
protests. Some legislators in the U.S. have proposed a ban on the use of
nuclear power sources in space. Although Congress is not likely to pass such a
measure, the proposed ban illustrates environmental concerns.
• Stations on the Moon and other celestial bodies shall be open mutually to
representatives of other nations after reasonable advance notice. Even this
general language does not apply in space to space stations. shuttles, platforms,
or satellites. Neither by treaty. international law. nor custom may anyone
inspect sovereign facilities in space. Although the U.S. may agree to inspections. on the Moon. Russia has taken a very stern stand against inspections;
therefore, in my opinion, these inspections are unlikely. The Antarctic Treaty.
in contrast, allows unannounced inspection of stations, installations, and
equipment; therefore we must not confuse these provisions with those of the
Outer Space Treaty. The Antarctic Treaty permits unconditional free access at
all times. This could change if there were more than scientific interest in
Antarctica. The Moon Treaty of 1979 has extensive inspection provisions but
little force or effect. because no space-faring nation of the West or East ratified
it. The "common heritage of mankind" provisions. which envision sharing
profits with all nations even though they have not contributed. is a major stickingpoint.

Conflicts Between U.s. Law and International Law
Federal statutes and treaties are of equal authority. If a statute and a treaty conflict,
the later in time controls (87 Corpus Juris Segundum Treaties 89). Therefore, statutes
and regulations may control the activities of U.S. industry and government, even to the
extent of revoking portions of an earlier international agreement or treaty.
SoteUite Telecommunications. Communications have been the most commercially
profitable use of space. with primary applications in telephone. telegraph, television.
and data transmissions. The unique properties of the stationary orbit over the equator.
which permits stationary positioning of a satellite. make it a limited natural resource.
Space ai: 35,680 km above the Earth is ample to accommodate many satellites with
little risk of collision. But the radio frequency and its bandwidth limit spacing to 2 deg

826

Limits on Mission Design

21.1

in order to .avoid interference. Reducing this spacing further will be expensive. The
ITU authonzes an~ controls the effective use of geostationary orbits and frequencies.
Under the International Telecommunication Convention and Vmal Protocol (Nairobi
1982) and the ITU's radio regulations, the system uses a ''first-come, first-served':
pr~urc:; o~ce a satellitt: is.registered with the ITU no subsequent system may interfere WIth Its Signal transmISSion. Generally, a similar replacement will retain the rights
of a registered satellite.
A. n~~ of co~cerns over allocation of slots led to a call for a Space World
Admmtslrative Radio Conference in 1985, which reconvcned in 1988 and 1992. In
p~cular, developing nations worried that no slots would be left for them. A compromIse left the conventional part of C and Ku radio frequency bands allocated only to
the Fixed Satellite Service on a ''first-come, first-served" basis. At the same time all
nations could obtain orbital slots and frequency channels on the expansion part of the
Service's frequency bands. Policies set up at the ftrst two WARCs began to be implemented a! the r.n0st ~nt conference. However, it was also apparent that this
ImI?lementation ~ll continue to evolve as power shifts among participants. The
n~tions also occasIOnally hold multilateral planning meetings to resolve area con~
flicts between themselves. Access to all other radio frequency bands allocated to all
other satellite services is still "ftrst-come, first-served" except the 12 GHz and 17 GHz
bands for Broadcasting Satellite Service.
In exercising its registration. functio~, ~e International Frequency Registration
Board does not evaluate the particular nation s reasons for making a particular assign~nt. The. Board seeks o~y to ensure that the national assignment conforms to idenlifted servIces for the asSIgned frequency and that transmissions do not interfere with
other broadcasts. Nations then determine how they will parcel out the allocated
frequencies to their people.
. If a proposed satellite could cause interference, the sponsoring nation resolves
ISSUes under negotiation procedures established by the ITU. The ITU conducts much
of its techni~al activi~es through ~e International Frequency Registration Board and
the Interna~onal ~adio C::0nsultative Committee. Since 1973, orbital positions have
been assocIated With particular frequencies and technical characteristics.
~. the U.S., the FCC allocates orbital slots and frequencies. To obtain an orbital
~Sltion or frequency, your legal department's FCC expert submits a formal application. The approval process may take 3 to 5 years for a new communications service or
up to a year for an existing satellite.
. An ongoing concern is the need to protect the GPS spectrum from disruption and
mterference. The Etm?peans at the World Administrative Conference in 1997 sought
to ?v~rlay a commercial ~adcast signal ?n the public service radionavigation band.
This Issue was addressed m the CommercIal Space Policy Act of 1998 with the Congress e~couragin~ regional agreements with foreign countries. like the 1998 agreement WIth JaI?aD' m order to make the U.S. GPS signal a globally accepted standard.
. Commercilll Launches. Commercial launch planners must consider the CommerCial Launch Act of 1984. As amended, it requires the DOT to approve and license all
comme~al ex~ndable vehicles if launched from U.S. territory or by a U.S. citizen or
corporation outside the U.S.
As the. F~deral ~egister indicates, before issuing a launch license the DOT requires
~th a mISSion ,reView and a safety review. The first review focuses on the payload
Itself and the flight.p!~. to ensure. that ~ mission is in accord with U.S. policy and
meets U.S. responSibIlities under mternational treaties. Regulations require the DOT

21.1

Law and Policy Considerations

8:27

to review how missions affect national interests. Although some fear this authority will
be used to block missions, Congress has declared privately conducted commercial

launches to be consistent with the national security and foreign policy interests of the
U.S. Time will tell what limitations will be imposed, but the Commercial Launch Act
thus far gives government considerable power over commercial activity.
The DOT also reviews procedures for launch safety, including:
• Procedures for safety controls for launch sites and flight corridors
• Range safety expertise
• Procedures for ground and flight safety
• Range tracking and instrumentation
• Vehicle safety systems
• Proposed vehicle design
For the foreseeable future, I expect this review to be conservative. Missions using
proven government launchers and national launching facilities should receive quick
approval. But a mission proposing to use a new and untested vehicle or launch site will
suffer close scrutiny.
DOT must coordinate commercial launches with all other interested agencies in the
Federal Government, particularly the DoD and the Department of State. For current
guidelines, contact the FAA.
The policy is now to require maximum utilization of commercial launch capabiHty
by the federal government. This includes planning missions in such a way so that they
match the space transportation capabilities of our commercial launch providers. The
main exceptions are national security or international collaborative efforts relating to
science or technology. Congress additionally mandated in the Commercial Space Act
of 1998 that DoD study Vandenberg AFB and Cape Canaveral Air Station to see what
upgrades are needed to enable a flourishing commercial launch industry.
Military Spaee Activities. The development, testing, and deployment of a spacebased defensive system must abide by the terms of the Anti-Ballistic Missile limitations Treaty between the U.S. and the USSR (October 3, 1972). Administration policy
will determine whether the U.S. will develop this system.
We also must acknowledge the possibility that international partners of the U.S.
may object to legitimate national security activity. For example, our allies who signed
up to help us develop the Space Station took exception to its potential undeftned DoD
activities, which they took to be SOl activities. CaDada announced it would withdraw
support for Space Station Freedom if the U.S. chose to conduct military activities,
unless those activities were limited to research.
Patent Issues. Patent law and intellectual property rights in the U.S. stem from the
fust national patent law enacted in 1790. It was based upon the U.S. Constitution
(1787), article 1, section 8, paragraph 8 that states, "Congress shall have power to•..
promote the progress of science and useful arts by securing for limited times to authors
and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries." That
limited period in the U.S. is now 20 years from the date of ftling for the patent with the
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
The U.S. law did not cover "space" so the U.S. Space Bill was enacted in 1990. It
provides that, "Any invention made, used or sold in outer space on a space object of
component thereof under the jurisdiction or control of the United States shall be
considered to be made, used or sold within the United States." This legislation follows

828

Limits on Mission Design

21.1

the "flagship" principle, which applies U.S. laws to ships on the high seas and aircraft
flying over international water. With regard to the International Space Station, the
International Governmental Agreement provides "... for purposes of intellectual
property law, an activity occmring in or on a Space Station flight element shall be
~med to have occurred only in the territory of the Partner State of that element's regIStry, except that for ESA-registered elements any European Partner State may deem
that activity ... occurred within its territory."
In view of the U.S. Space Bill, the IGA, the Registration Convention and the
provisions on registration in the Outer Space Treaty in appears that U.S. law is the law,
which is most often applicable. In situations where U.S. law is not applicable there are
no clear answers, and therefore considerable commercial risk to space missions from
both a policy and economic perspective may be present
The mission planner should be aware of two patent cases. Hughes Aircraft
CompanylWilliams in 1973 obtained a patent relating to the spin stabilization of
satellites to assure obtaining and maintaining satellite attitude on orbit Hughes Aircraft Company sued the U.S. Government for infringement of its patent, because the
government nsed the concept without paying for it. It was not until 1983 that multibillion-dollar decision against the Government was handed down after the U.S. and
others had launched 108 satellites, which infringed the patent rights of Hughes Aircraft
Co~pany. The lesson is clear; patent infringement may have very significant econOmIC consequences
The second concern stems from a patent granted to TRW/Horstein et al. in 1995.
Patent rights are based upon the "claims" in the patent application. The main claim of
this patent in essence is an "orbital shell" above the Earth from 5,600 to 10,000
nautical miles reserved for TRW exclusively, for all communications applications to
mobile handsets. Soon after the patent was granted TRW sued ICO Global Communications Ltd. to prevent them from launching satellites into the proscribed altitudes. The
case was dismissed because there was no present infringement.
Nevertheless, this is a troublesome patent, because it flies directly in the face of the
~te~ Space ,!,~ty provisi~n~ on nonappropriation of space by any nation including
Its pnvate entities. In my opmIOn the patent IS fatally flawed if it is interpreted to give
any property rights to a spatial location. Were another nation to raise the issue in the
U.N. or some other forum, the U.S., under its treaty obligations, would have no alternative but to "correct" the situation by legislation or cause a review of the original
patent by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. A mission planner must, however,
face the risks of litigation, Which entail not only lost time but also the economic
consequences.
21.1.2 U.s. Space Polley
A cohesive, consistent U.S. space policy does not exist. This conclusion follows
from the lack of success of the program to get us into space. It has not reached new

technological or cultural plateaus nor even maintained the initial pace.
What then must the mission planner consider from a U.S. policy prospective in
mission design? Policy direction can change so quickly that the shorter the design and
construction cycle, the better. Experience teaches us that government funding for
projects can evaporate overnight. This being the case; get your money up front if
IJ<?Ssible, or ~t least attempt to obtain ''fenced" funding.· For government projects you
WIll need a smgle powerful backer or several who can provide funding. Political and
economic support may be available from various sources. However, the advantage of

21.1

Law and PoHcy Considerations

829

. securing interest and support from a number of sources may be more than offset by the
necessity to serve various conflicting goals.
Policy edicts may be forthcoming from an administration, particularly the National
Space Council, vocal committees of the Congress, and of course, industry groups. Do
not be misled by the apparent credibility of the source or the clarity of the proposed
goal. Words are cheap. All too often promises are made but are not backed up with
budgeting and funding.
Even if you are doing a commercial project you will need an expert to advise you
on national space policy sensitivities. The problem is you do not need to find
friends-you only need to avoid enemies. The most likely enemies are potential competitors. While they probably cannot block your project directly, they may have
friends in government who can. Accordingly, if it is possible, design the project in
such a way that it is cooperative with others and not in direct competition. You should
also be careful to assess what law and policy implications may arise from the proposed
mission. These concerns may IJe national and international.
An example of this intergovernmental coordination was the effort by Space Industries, Inc., to secure government funding for the ISF (Industrial Space Facility).
Hoping to get a fast start, they submitted the proposal to a congressional committee
without adequate coordination with NASA and other interested governmental agencies. They were successful in getting support from the committee and the National
Space Council. They were even mentioned specifically in President Reagan's 198.8
space policy report. All of this withered and died because they had not made theIr
peace with the supporters of the Space Station who felt that money spent on the ISF
would be taken from Space Station funding and might ultimately result in the Space
Station project being reduced or cancelled. The net result was that the ISF became tied
up in red tape and did not get funding.
.
.
The bottom line is that space mission analysis and design must concern Itself WIth
the vagaries of policy and the multitude of concerns and interests that exist in the
political arena.
Tighter constraints of federal budgets and an increasing demand for some form of
economic return on federal investments has led to insistence by Congress that the
federal government work with industry and buy from the private sector when possible.
The 1998 legislation requires NASA to identify opportunities for commercial pr0viders to participate in the International Space Station and to study the possibility of
turning the space shuttle operation plus the space station over to commercial operators
after it is assembled in orbit. ~dditionally space science data must be purchased from
commercial providers to the extent possible.
21.1.3 Responsibility-Liability and Insurance
The Outer Space Treaty, Article VI, fIrst established a nation's responsibility for its

acts in space, as well as those of its citizens acting privately. This provision .Iooks to
the future and requires a nation to authorize and continually supervise all of Its space
activity to assure it conforms with treaties and international law. We must take into
account this risk of regulation when we design a project and plan how to accommodate
governmental supervision.
• Fenced fimding is a term deriving from appropriations usage, meaning that monies allocated
for a certain purpose cannot be otherwise allocated. even within the SaDIe agency or

organization.

830

Limits on Mission Design

21.1

liability, the other side of the responsibility coin, looks to the past. The Outer Space
Treaty, Article vn, fIrst specifIed Ii.ability for space activity. Then came the 1972
Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects. This
Convention was intended to protect the nonspace-faring nations, so it held spacefaring nations absolutely liable if they caused injury or damage on Earth. Absolute
liability simply means that someone who is injured may claim compensation just by
proving damage and who did it, without having to demonstrate negligence or fault If
damage occurs in space, however, space-faring nations must prove fault to recover
damages.
The procedure for settling claims calls fIrst for negotiations by the nations involved.
The only claimant under the Convention is another nation, bringing a claim on its own
behalf or on behalf of its citizens. If these negotiations fail, a three-member claims
commission is fonned. Each nation involved appoints one member. The two appointed
members then appoint a third, the chainnan.
The fmt case under this Convention involved the reentry of Cosmos 954 over the
Northwest Territory of Canada on January 24, 1978. Negotiations between Canada
and the USSR were successful. The nuclear reactor scattered radioactive debris over
124,000 km2• The search and recovery effort (Operation Morning Light) cost Canada
almost $14M Canadian dollars, but it settled for $3M. Canada elected not to claim the
cost of $8M for its officials and employees nor for equipment. The USSR argued that
Canada was too meticulous in the clean-up opemtions and that if this event had
occurred in Siberia, she would not have expended that much effort. Additionally, the
USSR asserted that she had offered to help clean up, but Canada rejected the offer. Had
she been permitted to help, the costs would have been much less. This amicable settlement for 50% of the claim set a positive precedent for the future.
Under the Liability Convention, the U.S. must pay when her space activities injure
citizens of other nations or their property. U.S. citizens may recover for personal injury
or damage under the Federal Tort Claims Act. Thus, the government requires insurance before authorizing a commercial launch. Government launches, both military and
civil, do not have formal insurance covemge, as the government is a self-insurer. If the
government suffers a loss, it allocates more funds from the public coffers.
For commercial launches and potentially those conducted for foreign governments,
we need to consider the following types of insurance:
• Pre-Launch. Pre-launch coverage insures against the risks from damage
during shipment of the launcher and the satellite, as well as during integmtion
and movement to the launch pad.
• Government Equipment. The government now requires launches on commercial expendable vehicles to provide insurance for loss to government launch
equipment and facilities. The Commercial Space Launch Act (amended 1988)
caps the amount at $lOOM. The Secretary of Transportation determines for
each launch vehicle ifless is appropriate; examples are $75M for the Atlas and
$80M for either the Titan or Delta.
• Third-Pari] Liobility. Launch vehicle opemtors and satellite owners may
cause injury to others through the reentry. The risk is small because these
objects generally bum up in the atmosphere during reentry. If they do not, they
would typically strike the ocean or one of the uninhabited areas that make up
most of the Earth's surface. Because of this low risk, covemge is less expen-

21.1

Law and PoHcy Considerations

831

sive though still required by DOT for launch vehicles and sateJJites and by
NASA for commercial satellites.
When NASA was the only means of access to space for commercial satellites,
their regulations established an insurance policy of $500M, with the government assuming the risk above that amount This limit was a pmctical one
because the insurance community could not insure a greater amount Now that
commercial launch vehicles will be the prime means of transportation into
space, Congress has established a similar cap of $500M, until the world's
insurance community can provide greater covemge. The pmpose of this
provision of the 1988 Amendment to the Commercial Launch Act was to
attempt to level the commercial playing fIeld as Arianespace requires an
FF400M insurance policy. This amount was based upon the prior NASA policy of requiring $500M covemge.
Private opemtors of launch vehicles must also concern themselves with
liability claims from citizens of the U.S. and around the world. The DOT regulations require covemge against this risk before issuing a launch license.

• Launch Failure. The most expensive insurance covemge insures the satellite
value from the moment of lift-off to on-orbit checkout The prices for this
covemge have risen from 50/0-10% of the satellite value to 250/0-30% and then
settled back to 16%-20%. Shuttle launches enjoyed about a 5% discount
Because it was a man-mted vehicle, the insurance community had a high confIdence in its reliability. In the early days, insurance companies charged very
low premiums for three reasons: they had few insurance losses; brokers knew
little about space vehicles and the risks involved; and they competed to get into
the business tiecause space had pizazz.
Premiums rose dramatically with the loss of the. Shuttle Challenger in 1986
and several failures of expendable launch vehicles shortly thereafter. In fact,
the space insurance community paid out 3 times more in loss claims than they
took in through premiums. Once the U.S. and Ariane progmms were back on
track, premiums modemted. Still, as we plan commercial launches, we must
try to choose launch vehicles and satellites with a history of success. Otherwise, insurance probably will be unavailable or prohibitively priced.

• Reflight. A coronary risk which the launch-vehicle manufacturer may cover is
a guarantee to refly the mission or indemnifIcation of the value of launch
service. Whether a company will provide either at no cost depends on the
launch vehicle's past experience and the competitive climate. A contract normally covers this risk, but I am sure the insurance community would cover it
for a price.
• Loss to Others on the Flight. Under provisions of NASA launch contracts, the
risk of damage to a payload by another payload or by NASA's actions falls
under a Hold Harmless Clause. This provision means that all parties to the
launch agree not to sue each other regardless of what happens. This pmctical
remedy came about because it is very difficult to calculate the risk and determin~ the premium. The risk also seemed low, and experience bears out this
assessment as no incidents have occurred. This solution is also true for companion satellites launched commercially.

i
,I
I'

,
I

832

Limits on Mission Design

21.1

• C!"-Orbit Performance. A further risk concerns whether a satellite will continue to pe~onn. Comm~ications satellites especially need coverage when
the launch Insurance tenrunates after on-orbit checkout Satellite owners must
have this ''life'' insurance coverage if they do not have sufficient resources to
"self insur~" .the risks. Banks that ~nance communications systems usually
demand this msurance. An alternative may be enough satellites on orbit to
back-up the system.
.
In the pru:t, buyers ?f space services (particularly communications service) con~ted to build a satellIte, sought a launch aboard the Shuttle or on Ariane, and then
~~ t~ secure one ~r more of th.e insurance coverages explained above. But competition m the satellite-construction and expendable-launch-vehicle industries has
changc:<l thi~ proced.ure. Instead, the buyer puts out a request for proposals calling for
~n-orblt del~very ~Ith acceptance after checkout. This change shifts the burden and
nsks. Onlr ~m~ ~Ill tell whether the ~ost to the buyer of a space service will be higher.
If competition IS mtense e~ough, whIch I predict it will be through the year 2010, the
cost may decrease. If so, this turnkey package arrangement will be the nonn rather than
the exception.
. One further note is appropri~te. It might appear reasonable for one of the aerospace
gtan~anufacturer of satelhtes or expendable launch vehicles--to step up and
proVIde Insurance guarantees themselves. But the IRS has taken the position that a corpo~tion may not set aside funds from successful launches to act as a reserve, without
papng tax~s on these funds. If companies could set aside untaxed reserves, they could
gam a co~slderable economi~ advantage by offering insurance potentially unavailable
from the msurance communIty, whose worldwide reserves are less than $20 billion
As ?D alternative, launch companies could acquire a block of insurance commitmen~
for Its launches from the insurance community and offer these to customers to sweeten
a deal.
In a perfect worl?, a~tu~al risk would reflect the cost of risk plus overhead
and profit. Cost of nsk IS SImply the total value of all losses experienced divided
by the total number of events or launches. Unfortunately, despite manufacturers'
qUO!ed success rates of 850/0-98%, we do not have enough total launches to derive actuariaIl~ co~t fi~es. Ther~fore, the price of insurance tends to depend on ''feel''
and vanous mtangtbles. As pomted out above, failures drive prices up, and successes
?ecrease them. Interestingly, these variations occur whether or not a failure was
Insured. Spa~ insurers paid nothing for the 1986 Challenger disaster; yet they were so
shak~ that msurance coverage was not available for a period of time. For up-todate I~surance coverage provisions and costs, contact Alexander and Alexander,
Washington, DC; Coroon and Black, Bethesda, MD; or Marsh and McLennon Washington, DC.
'

21.1.4 Remote Sensing
. ~yone phl1l~ng to launch a satellite that can sense the Earth needs to know the
PrinCIples Relating to Remote Sensing of the Earth from Space, a resolution adopted
by the ll..N. General :Asse~bly o~ December 3, 1986. The USSR sought to prohibit
the ~e~smg of a natio~ WlthOU~ Its consent ~d the. developing nations sought to
prohib~t the release of information about a nation WIthout its consent. Instead, this
~Iution was a victory for the "open skies" policy of the U.S. and the space-faring
nations.

Law and Polley Considerations

21.1

833

The key points are:
• It is a resolution, not a treaty, but as the world continues to follow its precepts

·it will become international law through custom.
• The resolution applies only to sensing ''for the pmpose of improving natural
resource management, land use and the protection of the environment" It does
not apply to applications related to national security.
• Data is divided into classes: primary or raw data, processed data, and analyzed
information. Primary data is the same as unenhanced data under the Land
Remote-Sensing Commercialization Act of 1984, so it must be released to all
customers at reasonable cost. Processed data and analyzed information is data
resulting from ''value added activity" over which a company can assert
property rights and refuse its release.
• The resolution states that nations will conduct remote-sensing activities with
respect for other nations' sovereignty, not damaging the legitimate rights and
interests of the sensed nation.
Legal arguments may affect how a reconnaissance or imaging satellite operates.
Originally, in a classified memorandum, President Carter prohibited a U.S. company
from disclosing remote-sensing infonnation with a resolution better than 10 m. President Reagan's space policy rescinded this prohibition in February 1988, because the
USSR was selling photographic images with 5 m resolution. France, Russia, Canada,
China, Japan, and India provide commercially available remote sensing imagery;
therefore if a nation or corporation wants to keep something secret, it had best hide it
The press will be the least of its worries. In my view, only cost will limit these
activities.
Since 1982 the U.S. government policy towards remote sensing technologies has
evolved from a very restrictive view of remote sensing as an intelligence gathering
methodology which was classified to a broader view which promotes privatization,
declassification and commercial exploitation. Efforts to expand this industry included
requiring NASA to acquire remote sensing data from commercial providers. However,
the industry has not developed as quickly as it might have because of lengthy coordination required by various federal agencies before a license to launch and operate a
satellite system is issued. Unless the Department of State yields to the Department of
Commerce and permits a reasonably unfettered development of a U.S. industry the
market will be served by foreign competitors. In order to encourage the emergence of
a competitive U.S. commercial remote sensing industry it.will be necessary for the
government to support investments in new remote sensing technologies, remove
unnecessary restrictions on the dissemination of privately gathered data, and streamline the licensing process.

21.1.5 Import and Export Restrictions
We need not consider restrictions on imports into the U.S. unless a project has
federal funding. In that event, the Buy America Act and domestic preference provisions in various other acts and regulations could affect. purcbases. In the past, an
exploding number of statutes and regulations direct federal agencies to give domestic
sources absolute or qualified preferences when they procure goods and services. These
provisions, with exceptions and qualifications, appear in trade legislation, appropria-

834

Limits on Mission Design

21.1

tion statutes, procurement laws and regulations, Executive Orders, treaties, and
Memoranda of Understanding with foreign governments.
~ general, the Buy America Act prohibits buying foreign goods rather than
semces, but NASA has held that a supplier of space services may not use foreign
goods to provide the service. Under this Act, a product is notforeign if more than 50%
comes from domestic sources, and the DoD may buy from NATO countries. The Act's
provisions and rules will give American mission planners headaches and keep many
contracting officers and lawyers fully employed.
Three mechanisms control exports from the U.S. FIrSt, commodities and technical
data on the commodities control list fall under the licensing requirement of the Export
:"-~nistration ~ct of 1979. The Commerce Department's Office of Export AdminIstration runs this program and has published a series of detailed regulations. An
example of this process in the space sector was the approval for Payload Systems, Inc.
to fly a crystal-growth experiment aboard the MIR space station.
The second control applies when a patent involves military technology. The
Departments of Defense and Energy review the export application, and either department may classify the information to keep it secret, thus preventing export.
The third restriction stems from the Arms Export Control Act The Office of
Munitions Control under the Department of State determines along with other Federal
agencies what items fall under the Act's licensing provisions. This office has considerable discretion in determining whether a license should be issued. As a result, the
United States Munitions List once included satellites and computer programs and
.
many other items not traditionally thought of as weapons.
The International Traffic in Arms Regulations implement the Arms Export Control
Act ~e Munitio~ List specifically includes rockets, spacecraft, space electronics,
and gwdance eqwpment Defense services are also included, defined as furnishing
help to fon:igners "in the design, engineering, developmen~ production, processing,
manufacturing, use, operations, overhaul, repair, maintenance, modification or reconstruction of articles." Included is the furnishing to foreigners any technical data
whether in the U.S. or abroad. Fmally, no one may provide foreigners technical data,
meaning information classified or even related to defense articles.
Under these regulations, an export does not have to cross a border. For example, an
export occurs when an individual discloses technical data concerning a spacecraft or
rocket, even if the disclosure is part of a potential sale and within the U.S. These rules
do not apply to NATO members, Australia, New Zealand, or Japan, but they still pose
significant hurdles if we are seeking a world market An example of this was the
application to the Department of State by United Technologies Corporation to assist
the Cape York Space Agency in developing a launch complex in Australia for the
Soviet Zenit Launch Vehicle.
21.1.6 Environmental Concerns
!he National Environmental Policy Act and its implementing regulations call for
revIew of the Federal Government's actions to determine their effect on the environment Major actions involve substantial time, money, and resources. They affect large
areas or act strongly on small areas. Recommendations on these actions must consider
their effects with special care.
When an action occurs in the U.S., we must take into account social economic and
other environments. When it occurs outside the U.S., the req~ments ~w.
Whether environmental protection extends to activities in outer space depends on how

21.1

83S

Law and Polley Considerations

we interpret the concept of global commons. In international law, "global commons"
includes those territories outside the jurisdiction of any nation, such as the high seas,
the upper atmosphere, the oceans, Antarctica, and particularly, outer space. Official
U.S. documents which discuss "global commons" have not specifically mentioned
outer space.
Whether the National Environmental Policy Act applies to outer space is not
entirely clear, but the U.S. still has obligations under Article IX of the Outer Space
Treaty which provides for international protection of the outer--space environment
Thus, we must comply with either the letter of the Act's provisions or their essence_If
a proposed mission "has been done before," environmental questio~ may quickly be
resolved. But if it includes something new, we may wait some time for approval,
depending on how strongly the mission affects outer space or, especially, any celestial

body.

.

For a government mission, the responsible agency must analyze the enVlfOnmen1al
effects. If more than one agency is involved, a lead agency supervises the preparatioOn
of the environmental documentation. For a private or commercial launch, the DOT
would require an environmental impact assessment under its mandate from the
Commercial Launch Act
Under the National Environmental Policy Act, we must complete either an environmental assessment or an environmental impact statement An assessment helps
determine whether we need an impact statement for a particular action. It must include
enough information to determine whether the proposed action is major and whether it
significantly harms the environment of the "global commons." We must assess the
environmental effects and the need for the proposed action plus available alternatives.
Unless security restrictions intervene, the assessment is available to the public l1p'OJl
request. There is no need to obtain public comment An assessment is less formal and
.
rigorous than an impact statement. Typically, it applies to:
• Spacecraft development projects in space science and in space and terrestrial
applications
• Specific experimental projects in space and energy technology
• Development and operations of new space transportation systems
• Advanced development of new space transportation and spacecraft systems
In contrast, we would need to ftle an impact statement when an action is "expected
to have a significant impact on the quality of the human environment" Our draft statement should be thorough enough to permit analysis and comment If it is complete
enough after agency review, it goes to the public for comment At this time, the
Department of State, the Council on Environmental Quality, and other federal
agencies also have the chance to comment For the· propo~ action and reasonable
alternatives, the environmental impact statement: (1) conSIders purpose and ~eed;
(2) provides a detailed description; (3) analyzes the environmental effects; (4) briefly
describes the affected environment of the "global commons"; and (5) compares the
alternatives' effects on the "global commons."
If we do not know something because it is unavailable or scientifically uncertain,
we must .say so in the impact statement. Public hearings are not required, but may be
appropriate, depending on circumstances. After agencies and the public have c(}mmented, we redo the statement, further analyzing any issues they have raised. Then we

836

Limits on Mission Design

21.1

publish it in the Federal Register before forwarding it to the decision maker for final
action.
Normally, we would need an impact statement for R&D activities associated with
developing and operating new launch vehicles, space vehicles likely to release large
amounts of foreign materials into the Earth's atmosphere or into space, and certain
systems for nuclear propulsion and generating power. Some listed exclusions do not
require a statement, but we probably will have to do an assessment if any "significant
environmental effects" are possible. Unless the project has been done before, we can
expect a bureaucrat to require an assessment of environmental effects, so he or she can
determine if an assessment is required! The first assessment should determine what is
required: (1) no environmental assessment; (2) only an environmental assessment; or
(3) an environmental impact st;ltement. Although it is difficult to predict exactly how
long this process will take, we should anticipate 3 to 6 months for a simple assessment,
one to 2 years for a simple impact statement, and up to 5 years for international concerns or a suit in federal court.
In some cases, the action may affect the environment of a foreign nation or a
resource designated as one of global importance. If so, we would use slightly different
procedures. First, we would prepare an environmental surveyor review. An environmental survey is a cooperative action and may be bilateral or multilateral. Whether or
not we do a review depends on consultations which determine if the proposed action
would do significant harm. The content is flexible, but generally includes (1) a review
of the affected environment, (2) the predicted environmental effects, and (3) significant known actions that governmental entities are taking to protect or improve the
environment against the proposed action. If the government is not acting, is this inactivity an oversight or a conscious decision?
The U.S. prepares an environmental review unilaterally. In effect, it is an internal
action, by which one or more governmental agencies surveys the important environmental issues associated with the proposed action. It contains essentially the same
information as an environmental survey.
lAsers and Particle Beams
Lasers and particle beams illuminating into space have caused almost no problems.
The reason is fairly straightforward: in the U.S., such experiments are carried out by
government laboratories or under government control. They have agreements with
NORADIUSSPACECOM to search the space catalog and provide windows of opportunity, so illuminating does not interfere with operational spacecraft.

Nuclear Power Sources
Nuclear power sources have raised questions since they were first used. The U.S.
program began using a radioisotope thermoelectric generator with SNAP-3A in the
summer of 1961 and continued to 1977. In April 1965, SNAP 10 was the only U.S.
space nuclear reactor. The U.S. safety program includes an Interagency Nuclear Safety
Review Panel composed of three coordinators appointed by the Secretary of Defense,
the Administrator of NASA. and the Secretary of Energy. The Nuclear Regulatory
Agency, the Environmental Protection Agency, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration also participate in these reviews. The safety review ascertains
whether the benefits of using nuclear power are worth the risks. The policy of the U.S.
in using radioisotope thermoelectric generators following an aborted SNAP-A mission
in April 1964 was to design the container so that all nuclear material would survive
intact, regardless of the nature of the accident. The policy makers specifically envi-

21.1

Law and Polley Considerations

837

sioned reentry and impact on earth. On May 18, 1968, the range safety officer aborted
the launch ofNIMBUS-81 at an altitude of 30 kIn over the Santa Barbara Channel. The
generator capsules were recovered without incident..Those w~ launched SN~ 10~
with a nuclear reactor in 1965 launched the reactor m a subcrittcal mode, desIgned It
to remain subcritical at or after impact should it reenter the atmosphere before startup, and delayed its start-up until it had reached or?i~ It is in ~ almost circular polar
orbit, which bas a decay life of 4,000 years. Addittonally, this reactor package was
designed to come apart on reentry.
Design for safety must include both system and ~ssion desi~. ~e m~~ods to
reduce risks from nuclear materials include contaiDlDg them WIthin radioISOtope
thermoelectric generators, diluting and dispersing them with reactors, delaying their
effects by boosting them into a higher orbit, and possibly retrieving them using a
vehicle like the Shuttle.
On the international front, the untimely reentry of Cosmos 954 in 1978 (see
Sec 21.1.3) caused great concern around the world and has been the subject of
cussion in the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. A working
group's February 1981 report on Cosmos 954 reaffirmed ~at nuclear power is safe in
outer space if it meets safety requirements. Some people sttll suggest ~ ban on nuclear
power, and Australia has specified solar rather than nuclear power m a request for
proposals for surveillance satellites.
Only the former USSR routinely used nuclear power to.run i~ Ra~ ~
Reconnaissance Satellites (RORSATs).1n the future, other nattons will conSIder this
power source to serve particular needs. For example, the U.S. had under .discussion
powerful reactors to provide power to space components of the StrategIC Defense
Initiative (SDI). The SP100s would generate 100 kW, some 25 times more powerful
than the RORSATs. These developments pose two risks: return to Earth with much
more fissionable material than on RORSATs and increases in radiation from gamma
rays and positrons. The positrons from the reactor temporarily form an artificial
radiation belt in the Earth's magnetic field. When they strike another spacecraft, the
positrons produCe penetrative gamma-rays. This radiation interferes with astronomers' readings of natural radiation from such phenomena as solar flares, neutron stars,
and black holes.
In the late 19808 such radiation from Soviet spacecraft occasionally overloaded the
gamma-ray spectr~meter on board the U.S. Solar Maximum Mission satellite. The
Japanese X-ray satellite, GINGA, also suffered. and the U.S. Gamma-Ray Observatory may be affected.
Thus as the need for nuclear power increases, we can expect greater pressure,
particul~ly from the scientific and astronomical communities, to stop its use. Considering its unique abilities, I predict that nuclear power will not be banned from space,
but its use will be closely regulated. Unless we must use a nuclear power somce to
complete a mission, we should select another form of power.

'!is-

Space Debris

Space debris is the other significant en~~ntal issue. It affects missi~
designers in two ways. FIrst, we must plan ~e m1SSIO~ to prevent or ab~te space d~~s
as much as possible. Second, we must desIgn satellItes to meet the .nsk o~ colli~lon
with debris. Aside from a few cries in the wilderness, space debris receIved little
official notice until the late 19808. Johnson and McKnight [1991] provide an extended
technical discussion of this problem, and Reijnen and de Graff [1990] provide a
discussion from a legal perspective.

-

I'

I

838

Limits on Mission Design

21.1

In 1986, the U.S. Air Force Science Advisory board questioned its 1983 position
that debris did not appear to be a problem. As a result, the DoD established in March
1987 a spac~ debris policy. It states in part that the "design and operation of DoD space
tests, expenments, and systems will strive to minimize or reduce accumulation of
space debris consistent with mission requirements."
In a final s~tement on space policy, released in February 1988, President Reagan
call~ for a reView of the U.S. policy on space debris. As a result, a Report on Orbital
Debns by!he Inter~gency Group (Space) was released in February 1989. It reflected
!h~ Group s uncertainty as to the urgency for action. Its major recommendation was a
Jo1Ot stu~y ~y NASA and DoD that would develop a con;tprehensive plan to improve
!he n,tomtonng ?~ debris, so debris predictions could be more accurate. The report
I?entifies two cntical areas in space for the near tenn. Low-Earth orbit requires attention ~ause of the large masses of material and the high relative velocities. At the .
same ~, th~ geosynchronous arc requires attention because of the number of spacecraft which Wllliose their maneuvering ability within the next few years. The report
then echoes the DoD policy on managing debris.
This report stands in contrast with the report of the ESA's Space Debris Working
Gro~p, .dated November~ 1988. The Director General observed that clearly the present
d~b~s 10 the space enVIrOnment poses little threat to either manned or unmanned
mISSIO~S. ,!l0wever, "w~ must adopt a conscious policy aimed at curbing the growth
of debns. ~e report lIsts the same two areas of concern- low-Earth and geosynchrono~ .orblts-and notes another concern for astronomical observers. It concludes
by ~wnng pre~e?ti~~ meas~: observing and analyzing present debris, avoiding
ColliSions, and mIDlID1Z1ng colliSion effects and future space debris. It asks nations to
reduce the number of pieces and the mass of space debris.
Strikingly~ th~ ESA's ~is a ~ ~o ~on. The agency is urged to start taking
steps--orgaruzational, technical, and mstitutionaJ.---to seek cooperation with others and
thereby counter the threat to space flight Why then does the U.S. simply want to study
the ~tter fnrth.er? ~e answer is both political and economic. Politically, the U.S. has
had. difficulty discuss10g technical issues with developing nations in the U.N. Time and
ag~ the
has .been outvoted on philosophical grounds and is not ready to hear
political dialogues 10 the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. The U.S.
therefore, looks to multilateral discussions with space-faring nations to solve problems:
The economic issue is equally sensitive. The U.S. is a space-faring nation which
plays a majo~ 1l?le in launching its own satellites and those of its western partners into
space. Thus, It IS loath. to set a policy "prematurely" which could cost a lot of money
to solve the space debns problem. The key words in the U.S. report are "where feasible
and ~ost-effective." The U.S. recognizes that the problem demands multinational
solutions but wants to avoid expensive "political solutions."
Advice: stay out of the politics if at all possible. Choose a launch vehicle that is at
least. no worse than average in terms of causing debris and plan the mission with space
debris abatement. f~tures. IT you minimize debris, you will get much faster approval
for your space mISSIOn.

!l.S.

21.1.7 FireSat LegaI and Polley Issues

At. ~t blush it would seem that there could be no issues at all. However, the first

q~estion IS w~ether FrreSat is going to be a U.S. Government project or a project with

pnvate financmg ..

21.1

Law and Pollcy Considerations

839

IT this is a government project the mission plamJer needs to evaluate whether the
Department of Agriculture or U.S. Forest Service is going to support funding or attempt to sabotage the project Will they see it as a boon to their fire fighting mission
or a threat, because there will be less need for fire fighting equipment andopersonnel,
which will jeopardize Congressional funding? What agency will be responsible for the
project after it is launched? Will their staffing and funding be increased to cover additional responsibilities? What international agreements cover firefighting support? Will
foreign nations have a right to the information from FrreSat? Does the U.S. face any
liability from the release of the information on fires? In other words, would there be
liability if FrreSat did not report a fire? Under the U.N. Principles on Remote Sensing
the U.S. is obligated to provide data to all nations at cost. Will the data supplied be raw
data or enhanced data? Who will supply the equipment to analyze the data? Will the
FtreSat mission as planned support all requests for information? What infrastructure
will be necessary to support the U.S.'s treaty obligations? Who will pay for it?
From a mission perspective how many satellites will be necessary? What is the
replacement strategy? Who are the launch providers going to be? Can these satellites
be launched with other satellites (size and position questions) or do they require dedicated launches? Are there any satellites using these altitudes? What is the space debris
situation? Are any special shields required to protect the satellite? Do the FrreSat sensors pose any threat of interference to other satellites? Are the mission and function of
the FrreSat satellites in total conformity with U.S. international policy? Might not
Brazil, for example, object to the monitoring of their forests, fearing that the U.S. was
trying to make a case to hold them responsible for their failure to control burning in
the forests?
These are examples of the kinds of questions that need to be answered. Inevitably
the answers cause more questions. From the limited information we have about the
FtreSat Mission, I believe that from a legal and policy' perspective the mission is
doable. I am aware of the saying, "If you cannot stand the answer do not ask the
question." However, it is a foolish mission planner that refuses to at least know of the
risks.
21.1.8 Asteroids
There has been recent interest in asteroids (Space Development Corporation) as a
potential mining opportunity. Private businessmen have proposed launching missions
to asteroids to bring back rare and precious metals. There is also interest in the Moon
and it is said to contain aluminum, calcium, iron, silicon, and small amounts of chromium, magnesium, manganese and titanium. It also has oxygen and sulfur. Some have
proposed to do this regardless of the legal and policy issues. The question of ownership
of asteroids and the right to sever valuable ore is not totally clear.
The M()()n Treaty of 1979 addresses the subject of mining the Moon, asteroids and
other celestial bodies. In general it provides for the establishment of an International
Regime to authorize and control any mining activity at such time as the exploitation
of natural resources becomes feasible. A critical element of the Moon Treaty is the
principle of the Common Heritage of Mankind. Under this principle there is the commitment that all nations must share in the management and benefits from such activity.
It is this provision for sharing of benefits without contribution of investment that has
.caused the U.S. and other space-faring nations to refrain from joining the treaty. Only
Australia, Austria, Chile, Mexico, Morocco, The Netherlands, Pakistan, The Pbilippines and Uruguay have ratified the agreement

840

Limits on Mission Design

21.2

The argument could be made that as long as the U.S. is not a party to the treaty U.S.
corporations should be permitted to conduct mining operations on the theory that what
is not prohibited is permitted. Standing alone this logic is sound, but it overlooks the
give and take in the international community on a vast number of issues. Many of the
developing nations firmly believe that they are entitled to share in the profits from
space activity and would deeply resent actions by U.S. or others from developed
countries "stealing" from them. Accordingly it is a virtual certainty that the U.S.
government would not issue a license to conduct mining activity on the Moon or other
celestial bodies.
The United Societies in Space has proposed a Lunar Economic Development
Authority and some modifications to the Moon Treaty so that mining operations could
be explored. Creating legal certainty will be the first step in financing such a project.
There was a similar situation with the 1982 Law of the Sea Treaty which was
resolved in 1994 by a U.N. General Assembly resolution. The provisions were modified to give the U.S. and other key nations a major say in the undersea mining and that
has facilitated exploration and the beginning of operations. This appears to be the most
viable solution to asteroid mining, but a first priority will be reducing transportation
costs.

21.2 Orbital Debris-A Space Hazard

Meteoroids

"C'

-!.

'E

~CIS

II.

E

21.2.1 Environmental Definition
Meteoroids have been a concern since the beginning of human spaceflight
Engineers performed a tremendous amount of work to understand the hazard posed to
spacecraft by meteoroids. While meteoroid-effect studies and model improvements
continue, researchers have understood the meteoroid background flux fairly well since
the late 19608. One meteoroid flux model is represented in Fig. 21-1. There has been
a resurgence of interest in meteoroids due to the possible storm conditions associated
with the Leonid meteor stream in 1998-1999 [yeomans, 1998]. While most meteor-

/),.

Goldstone Radar Data
(562-589 kin)

x

Arecibo Radar Data

(200-1,000 kin)

catalog Data

(400-500 kin)
10-1

Catalog Data

(800-1,100 kin)
10-2

Co
)C

:J

Ii:

10-3
10-4
10-5

~

10"""'1

lIE LDEF Craters

10-7

+

10-8
10-5

LDEF Craters

...........................,.•..

------ ---

Solar Max Data

10-2

10-4

Ronald A. Madler, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
Darren S. McKnight, Titan Research and Tech.nology
Abeut 20,000 tons of natural material consisting of interplanetary dust. meteoroids
and asteroid/comet fragments filter down to the Earth's surface every year, with
several hundred kilograms in LEO at anyone time [Kessler, 1985; Zook et al., 1970].
This natural hazard has been recognized as a danger to space travel since the 194Os,
but now human activities in space have created a hazard of even greater concern.
Figure 21-1 portrays both the natural environment and the artificially created debris
population [Adapted from NASA and NRC sources]. Millions of kilograms of artificial debris orbit the Earth and present a serious concern to continued safe access to
space. The growth of orbital debris poses a series of difficulties for space mission
designers. To control the growth of debris and its associated hazards, we should take
a number of steps during the design process. As seen in Fig. 21-2, the debris mitigation
process spans all phases of the mission profile. Similarly, NASA debris mitigation
guidelines cover all aspects of the mission design process. These guidelines can be
found in NASA Safety Standard 1740.14 [1995], while software to parallel the safety
standard is also available from NASA.

841

Orbital Debris-A Space Hazard

21.2

'-\

10-1
10°
Diameter (em)

Rg.21-1. Comparison of the Ruxes of Meteoroids and Orbital Debris for Low-Altitude
Orbits (Adapted from the NatIonal Research Council and NASA !lOurces). This
figure shows !hat human·generated orbital debris has much higher Impact rates !han
meteoroids for large and very small debris diameters.

MltIgaUon of•••
• Operational Oebrls
• Explosions/Collisions
• Secondary Debris
• Deterioration

Sate/Hte Operations

MlUgaUon of•••
• Spent Rocket Stages
• Separation DevIces
• Deployment
Mechanisms

~

1

Launch!
D '

t

t

ep,o~en=-~

~~~ ,
~

.

Protect Assets by. • •

Removal by•••
• Disposal Orbit
• Deorbltby

~=Deboost
~

.Shleldlng
AcIIve/Passive Avoidance
~ Mission
• Redundancy
Termination
__________________________________
___

Rg. 21-2. Debris MlUgaUon Processes.

~

Limits on Mission Design

842

21.2

oids have relative velocities of about 19-20 kmls with respect to the Earth, the Leonids
have a relative velocity of approximately 70 kmls. * This higher velocity will produce
more damage on impact, which could be of concern to spacecraft owners and
operators. There were no significant anomalies associated with the 1998 Leonids.
We define debris as any norioperational manmade object in space. These objects
include nonfunctioning payloads, used rocket bodies, mission-related debris (e.g., lens
covers or separation devices), debris from surface degradation (e.g., insulation or paint
chips), and debris from on-orbit fragmentation. This derelict hardware accounts for
93% of the cataloged objects in orbit; only 7% are active payloads. Table 21-1 shows
the breakdown of cataloged objects [Johnson et al., 2002]. Table 21-2 shows causes
for these on-orbit fragmentation events. Debris from the more than 175 fragmentation
events are by far the largest source of orbital debris.
TABLE 21-1. Cataloged Orbital Debris Objects. We can help reduce the amount of orbit
debris by acting responsibly.
Breakup Debris

40%

Spacecraft

30%

Rocket Bodies

18%

Operational Debris

12%

Orbital Debris-A Sp;u:e Hazard

21.2

to 2,000 km altitude for cataloged objects of various sizes. The GEO curve represents
the spatial density within 1 deg of the equatorial plane. The average density between
800 and 1,000 km is just above 1(r8 km-3• The smallest trackable objects may weigh
tens to hundreds of grams. We cannot shield against objects of this size. In GEO the
average spatial density is one to two orders of magnitude less than LEO. The average
relative velocity in LEO between orbiting objects is 9. to 10 km/s with maximum
values above 14 kmls due to eccentric and retrograde orbits. In comparison. the relative velocity between debris and satellites in GEO ranges between 100 and 500 mls.
The difference in relative velocities is due mainly to the lower orbital velocities and
smaller inclination distribution of objects in GEO. This physical phenomenon couples
with the lower spatial density values in GEO to make the collision hazard much
smaller in GEO than LEO.
1W7

r----.----,----.----.-----.----.----,----.----.
AD ca1aIog (May 1998) (highest line)

TABLE 21-2. Causes for On-orblt Fragmentation [Johnson et aI., 2002]. We can reduce frag-

mentation debris by properly venting propulsion systems.
Deliberate Breakup

30%
31%

Unknown Cause

28"k

Battery

4.5%

CoUision

-

'_,_I

CaIaIog objec1s > 0.5 m d1ameter (May 1998) (lower dashed line)

Propulsion System Malfunctions

Aerodynamics

843

400

800

800

1.000

1,200

1,400

1,600

L

__ _

1,800

2,000

A1tItuda(km)

1~r-----_.-----,,_----.------,----~~----_,

6%

0.5%

The U.S. Space COIDIiland compiles the trackable debris tracked by its worldwide
Space Surveillance Network (SSN) in a satellite catalog. This worldwide network of
radar and optical facilities senses, tracks, identifies, and catalogs data on over 8,500
large orbiting objects. It senses objects with diameters as small as 10 em in LEO and
1 m in GEO. This detection limit is due to the original design of the system for tracking
large objects-debris detection was never envisioned as a task for the network. We
know that there exists a much larger population of smaller objects. This has been con·
firmed by recent campaigns with more sensitive radars. Figure 21-1 shows that there
are approximately an order of magnitude more objects in the 1 em size than exists in
the catalog. The 1 em size is significant because it is the largest size fragment that we
can effectively shield against Thus, there are a significant number of objects that we
cannot track, but which can cause substantial spacecraft damage.
We can quantify how crowded space has become by using the spatial density, i.e.,
the number of objects per volume of space. Figure 21-3 plots spatial density values out
• Editor's Note: The Leonids are remnants of Comet 55PfI'empel-Tuttle. They are in a retrograde orbit and collide with the Earth nearly head-on such that their velocity adds to the
Earth's orbital velocity of about 30 kmls.

NOTE: GEO da1a Is fOr ± 1 degree latitude

Rg.21-3. Spatial Density Values. Densities In GEO are approximately 10 times less than In
LEO. The probabOIty of a spacecraft getting hit by something big Is small, whDe the
chance of getting hit by something small Is big. See text for discussion.

In addition to the spatial density being different in LEO vs. GEO. the natural
cleansing effects also differ. In GEO and geosynchronous transfer o~it the majo.r Jl.efturbations are solarlIunar gravitational effects. For very small debris, solar radiation
pressure may also significantly affect lifetimes. how~ver, atmospheric ~ at ~O
has no measurable influence. Hence, a major breakup m geosynchronous orbIt will affect all future operations in. that regime. On the other hand, atmospheric drag greatly
affects the lifetimes of objects in LEO. The smaller debris fragments have signifieantly larger area to mass ratios and thus drag affects them more. This natural removal of

844

Limits on Mission Design

21.2

orbital debris is very important in the long-term definition of the environment. We
have sensed decreases in the cataloged population only during periods of maximum
solar activity (1979-80 and 1988-90). However, in the 2000-2001 period of high solar
activity the overall cataloged population stayed fairly constant due to several significant breakup events.
The other major variables in debris growth are the number and types of satellite
fragmentation events. As the debris population grows, the environment may become
so severe that satellite or object fragmentations due to hypervelocity collisions with
debris may occur [Kessler and Cour-Palais, 1978]. This type of event will mark a clear
trend toward a worsening environment. The first confirmed collision between cataloged objects occurred in July 1996. The altitude of a breakup will foretell the effect
on the long-term debris environment. Breakups below 500 km may have a major
influence for less than a decade while fragmentations above 500 km may pose large
hazards for many decades. Presently, there is no cost-effective method of removing
debris already in orbit. The prudent design of future spacecraft will lessen the chance
of debris generation and satellite fragmentation.
It is difficult to describe precisely the present status of the dynamic near-Earth
debris environment, much less to accurately predict the future debris environment, due
to uncertainties in traffic models and fragmentation rates. The trackable population
grew at a nearly linear rate from 1960 to 1990. We don't know exactly how the
undetectable population grew, but it is more strongly influenced by the fragmentationevent rate, satellite operational patterns, and the solar cycle [Johnson and McKnight,
1991]. Predictions of the actual number and flux of all debris rely on accurate modeling of its sources and sinks. We compare debris models with our best measurements
of the environment: impact rates on returned spacecraft surfaces for very small debris
and special radar measurements for detectable objects. We continually improve and
update these models as our understanding of the debris environment grows. Spacecraft
designers can look for the latest environmental models .through one of the NASA,
DoD, ESA, or other international space agency Space Debris program offices.
21.2.2 Design Considerations: Spacecraft Hazard and Survivability Analysis
Mission designers must address two main issues concerning space debris. First, we
need to design debris protection for large, long-lived spacecraft to ensure mission success. Second, we must use debris mitigation methods to ensure that space activities
will not continue to litter our near-Earth environment with more derelict hardware
[NSS 1740.14, 1995].
We can approximate the probability, Pc, of a piece of debris impacting a space
system using the kinetic theory of gases:
Pc = l_e(-SPD·AC·T·VREL)

(21-1)

where SPD is the spatial density of debris objects (i.e., average number of objects per
volume in space), AC is the collision cross-sectional area, T is the mission duration,
and VREL is the relative velocity between the satellite and debris population. Using
this simple equation, the rough order of magnitude approximation for collision
probability for one year in orbit for a range of altitudes and satellite sizes is listed. in
Table 21-3. These values are approximate and only show the order of magnitude for
the probability of collision. Detailed analysis should use a more accurate debris environment model [for example, Klinkrad et aI., 1997 or Liou et al., 2002], as well as a

845

Orbital Debris-A Space Hazard

21.2

more refined representation of the spacecraft's cross-sectional area. Also space
satellite designers must take the meteoroid en~nment. into account. Meteoroi~
dominate the hazard for sub-millimeter up to IDllhmeter SIZe, and can penetrate thin
honeycomb structures.
TABLE 21-3. Collision Probability per Year (In 1999). The table values are approximated over
all inclinations for a cross-sectional area range of 5 to 40 m2. The cross-sectional
area Is defined as the area viewed from one orientation, and is approximately 1/4
of the total surface area for simple convex shapes.
.
Collision Probability per Year
Altitude
(km)

Traekable

1 em diameter

1 mm diameter

1Q-6-1Q-5

1()-4-10-3

10-2-10-1

800

1Q-5-1 0-4
1Q-5-10-4
1Q-5-10-3
1()-4-1 0-3

1,000
1,200
1,500
2,000

10-4-10-3
10-4-10-3
1Q-5-10-3
1Q-6-1Q-5

1()-4-10-3
1()-4-10-3
1()-4-10-2
1Q-3-10-2
10-3-10-2
10-3-10-2
1Q-3-1 0-2
1Q-5-1 0-3

10-1-1
10-1-1
10-1-1
10-1-1
10-1-1
10-1-1
10-1-1
10-2-10-1

300
400
500
600

The cataloged population presents a manageabl~ deb?s hazard to even large
spacecraft. However, incorporation of nontrackable objects tnt? the hazard assessment
produces much larger probabilities of collision. The flux rate Increases several or~ers
of magnitude for untrackable debris that can still cause dama~e. An enco~nter WIth a
1 cm fragment will likely produce significant amounts of de~ns, muc~ of It trackable,
while a 1 mm impact most likely will cause surface degradation, localized craters and
small penetrations.
.
For GEO satellites, we may use alternate forms of probabili.ty of co~lision equa!I0ns
which are more convenient due to the physically and dynamically ~Ifferent ~?vlTOn­
ment [Johnson and McKnight, 1991]. The obj~ts ~ave l?~er orbital velOCItIes and
most reside in a narrow latitudinal band resulting In a distinct contrast to the more
randomly distributed LEO environment. The hazard in GEO appears to be about a
decade behind LEO, but the GEO population will grow quickly because there are
fewer natural sinks.
.
.
While we can determine the expected rate of ll?pact for ~ertain s~ed m~teorOids
and debris relatively easily with one of the avaIlable OT?ltaI debris env~?IDent
models. determining the hazard to a spacecraft is not as straIghtforward. Christiansen
et aI. [1992] outline this process as:

1. Determine failure or damage conditions for the mission
2. Determine impact conditions causing failure or damage
3. Determine likelihood offailure (integrating the step 2 equatio~ over.the flux,
direction, velocity, and projectile characteristics from debris envlTonment
models)

Limits on Mission Design

21.2

4. Assess sufficiency of the design
5. Modify the design or requirements, if needed
Due to the dynamic nature of the debris environment, the best strategy is to inte?I"ate d~bris awareness into all phases of the design process. However, it will be
IncreasIngly expensive to actually implement any system changes the later in the
design process. Special attention to the protection of mission critical systems may stiD
be considered late in the design process.
The first step mentioned above entails determining what constitutes a failure or
unacceptable mission degradation. This is something each spacecraft may define differently and will influence the hazard assessment. For the International Space Station
loss of a module or loss of life may be the unacceptable damage level, while for ~
unmanned spacecraft it may be loss of any critical system, such as attitude control.
The second step depends on the many unknowns of the projectile and the spacecraft
structures. In order to proceed with the hazard analysis, we must derive some kind of
equatio~ rela~ng damage to projectile characteristics. For pressure vessels, where
penetration WIll have serious implications, a ballistic limit equation is determined
which relates the projectile characteristics to the penetration ability for a specific
spacecraft wall. Researchers have determined equations for single walled spacecraft
and multilayered shielding configurations [Hayashida and Robinson 1991· Christiansen et al., 1995; Christiansen, 1993]. Armed with the performanc~ equations for
the spacecraft surfaces, we can determine a probability of failure by integrating over
all the ~x~ted projectiles from the debris models (step 3 above). The next step is to
detenmne If the probability of success is sufficient for the mission; If the probability
of sD:ccess is not sufficient, then we need further protective measures or design modifications. The RADARSAT mission is an example of a spacecraft that did not have an
acceptable level of risk after the preliminary design. Approximately 17 kg of shielding
was added to reach a comfortable level [Warren and Yelle, 1994].

847

Orbital Debris-A Space Hazard

21.2

curves are for different shielding configurations which have the same weight as the
single wall. Shielding systems have one or more outer bumpers and sometimes intermediate backup layers before the innermost wall. Bumper shielding systems work
by fragmenting or vaporizing the projectile with the first layer when the projectile has
a very high velocity. The resulting debris cloud expands and hits the next layers over
a larger area, dispersing the energy of the projectile and the impulsive load. In the case
of a pressure vessel, this shielding increases the probability that the pressure hull will
survive impacts-without penetration, rupture or spall with a much thinner pressure
wall. In other words, when we optimize bumper shields, the resulting two or more
walls weigh less ~d provide better protection from particulate impact than a single
wall design. The bumper system has three main design parameters:
1. Thickness and material of the outer wall (shield or bumper)
2 .. Spacing between the shield and the backup layers
3. Thickness and material of the backup layers
0.5
0.45

E
.g. 0.40

S

~ 0.35

is

.!l 0.30

1I 026
...m

t

020

...Iii 0.16

Debris Protection
~e o~ ~escribe the expected damage of a debris impact, to first order, by the
relative kInetic energy of the impacting object. For a relative impact velocity of 10
kmIs, a 100 g fragment (6-10 em diameter) possesses the kinetic energy equivalent to
1 kg of TNT. On the smaller end of the scale, a 1.6 mm debris object has the same
kinetic energy as a 9 mm pistol slug. The amount of energy absorbed by the structure
and the level of damage is highly dependent on the impactor characteiistics, satellite
struc~e and .I~ation of impact.
it is difficult to determine the effect of a hypervelOCIty ~~~ Impact <.>n a satelbte WIthout a considerable amount of specific satellite
and colhslOn Information. Nevertheless, a 100 g object impacting at 10 kmIs wiIl
prod~ce extensive damage on any satellite, and would destroy any small, compact
satelhte, given a center of mass collision.
. Spa~~ win encounter micrometeoroids and orbital debris during their function~ hfetime. However, there are passive and active means to protect them from most
debns ..1'.assive ~eans include shielding and redundancy, while active generally refers
to colhslOn aVOidance. Bumper shields are effective for passive protection against
fragments smaller than 1 em in diameter (mg range).
. Fi~ 21-4 ~ualitatively shows how ~ffective shielding systems are at defeating
an Impacting particle. The bottom curve IS for a single sheet wall, while the other

!bus:

0.10
0.06
00

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Impact Velocity (lonIs)

Fig. 21-4. BalllsUc Umlt Curves for Several Satellite Wall ConfiguraUons. This figure
qualitatively shows the penetrating diameter of an impacting projectile vs. the Impact
velocity for a single wall and two shielding options. The three sections of the shieldlng
curves correspond to projectile deformation, projectile fragmentation, and projectile
melt or vaporization, respectively, as the Impact velocity Increases. This assumes
spherical aluminum projectiles.

The design of the shield depends on the shield-to-projectile mass density ratio and
the projectile's impact velocity. The debris environment parameters will vary by
altitude and change over time as events alter the environment. For a given environment
and spacecraft configuration (exposed area, structure and mission duration), we optimize the shield thickness, ts ' and wall spacing, S, to insure projectile fragmentation.

848

Limits on Mission Design

21.2

This highlights the main function of the shield: to break apart the impacting object so
that its debris will hit the backup layer(s) over a larger area. causing less damage,
The ability of the shield to lessen the effect of the projectile's impact is directly
proportional to the shield's ability to break it apart The optimum situation occurs when
the shield and projectile fragments vaporize or liquefy, In this state they present less
hazard to the backup layer(s), Testing by NASA has shown that the ratio Vd, where d
is the impacting particle's length, is around 0,1 to 0.2 for a functional shield [CourPalais, 1979]. This range is good for aluminum-on-aluminum impacts in the velocity
range 5-12 kmls. We obtain more beneficial effects if the shield has a low melting point and high mass density, both of which will produce more damage to the
projectile and a lower probability of solid particles striking the backup sheet [CourPalais, 1979].
The equation for determining the "optimum" backup sheet thickness, tb' assumes
that shield and projectile debris are mostly in molten or vaporized states. For a basic
form of aluminum (7075-T6), the equation for the condition where the backup sheet
will not deflect, rupture, or spall is given by Cour-Palais [1979]:
(21-2)
where tb is the backup sheet thickness in em, m is the projectile mass in g, v is the
projectile velocity in kmls, S is the spacing in cm, and an empirically derived constant
C =41.5 ±14.0 (em3 g-l km-1s).
The optimum design of a shield depends on the physical properties of the projectile
and its velocity. A design which works at one speed may not be as effective at other
speeds due to the characteristics of hypervelocity impacts. Also, the composite and
sandwich construction methods common on many commercial spacecraft have different properties than simple aluminum structures [Taylor et al., 1998]. System designers
should look for the latest references because the science and art of shielding progresses
rapidly.
Structures such as the International Space Station must have extensive shielding to
survive the particle environment. Multilayered shielding will greatly reduce the probability of a penetration to the pressure hulls of the Station. Other spacecraft also have
vulnerable systems and components that must be protected to ensure a successful
mission. Mission critical systems and components must either have special shielding
from debris, or be shielded by less critical structures. An understanding of the debris
hazard can help spacecraft designers to minimize the cost of the spacecraft by designing survival into the vehicle from the beginning. Table 21-4 lists some common sense
design guidelines.

Debris AvoUlance
Some satellites may face a significant hazard due to trackable objects. In this case,
designers and operators may need to use passive and active avoidance techniques.
Passive collision avoidance methods include minimizing the size (cross section) of the
spacecraft, either by reducing the actual size or controlling the attitude to have a
smaller profile with respect to the debris impact directions. For most LEO spacecraft,
the normalized average relative impact rates by spacecraft surface are: 10 kmls for
leading edge ± 45°, 2 kmls for surfaces 90° to the ram direction, 1 kmls for trailing
edge, 0.1 kmls for space pointing, and 0.01 kmls for Earth pointing surfaces. Operators

Orbital Debris-A Space Hazard

21.2
TABLE 21-4.

849

Common Sense Design Guidelines.

• Design for end-of-lHe environment

• Make critical systems redundant

• Have a "debris expert" on the project

• Don't create or leave debris in orbil

• Make sure everyone on a project Is famDlar
with the debris hazard. .

• Shield or shadow sensitive surfaces and
systems with less sensitive components
when possible.

• Perlorm a cost-benefit tradeoff study of
systems to allow for degraded perlormance
due to debris (e.g., thermal control, power).

• Recognize that Impacts of small debris
make surfaces more susceptible to atomic
oxygen damage end degradation.

• Orient sensitive objects that must be
exposed to space on the spacecraft's

• Consider possible damage beyond
parloratlon: spallation, hlgh-veloclty
fragments from Impact site, impulsive
loading, and plasma from particle strikes on
solar arrays Oeadlng to possible electrical
discharge).

trailing edge or facing the Earth to decrease
particle strikes.

could also place the spacecraft in a less populated orbital regime; however, this is not
possible for most missions.
We may need active debrfs avo~ce f?r criti~al spac~ structures s~~h as ~pace
stations or satellite constellations. This reqwres active tracking of co-orblting objects,
additional propellant, coordination with satellite tracking facilities (such as
USSPACECOM), and coordination with co-orbiting spacecraft operators. At the present time, systems such as the International Space Station, th~ Space Shu~e, and ~O
satellite constellations are the only missions using or planntng to use active colhslOn
avoidance. The Shuttle has made several highly publicized maneuvers to avoid cataloged objects. Active avoidance is only practical for protec~on from the. largest of
fragments and may still be suspect since ground-based tracking accuracy IS poor for
most orbiting objects (unless the tracking system ~xpends extra eff~rt to update a
specific satellite). Thus, it is not a cost-effective option for most satellite operators at
this time.

Debris Mitigation

All space users have a responsibility to include debris mitigation techniques in th~ir
mission profiles. As identified in Fig. 21-2, there are ~ee phases where ~ c~ mmimize the addition of debris to the environment. While non-governmental missIons do
not have any debris mitigation regulations at this time, the U.S. Government r~~
its missions to minimize debris [NSS 1740.14, 1995; NMI 1700.8, 1993]. Additional
regulations and guidelines are in work by both NASA and the UN.
Launch system designers should plan their scenarios to reduce launch-rel~
debris such as protective shrouds, separation devices and e~ded ~k~t bodies.
They should not allow this hardware to reach long-lived orbits. Histonc~y,. an
average of three large pieces of debris are produced from eac~ successful. JDlSSlOn.
However, the launch process probably generates many more nontrackable PIeces.
As a satellite is inserted into its final orbit, we should take care not to produce
debris during the last impulsive maneuvers. A major source of debris in the past ~as
exploding rocket .stages. Some of these propulsion-related .e~plosions occun:ed dunng
attempted burns while others resulted from inadvertent lDlXlng of hypergobc fuels or

.1

Limits on Mission Design
~

overpressurization years after the rocket's last use. Designers corrected this
problem on many rocket bodies by venting the fuel or conducting an idle burn.
Before we declare a satellite operational, we must deploy its solar panels, uncover
its instruments, and stabilize its orientation. Given the present design of satellites, all
these activities may release hardware into space. As a satellite operates and ages, paint
chips off and small pieces of hardware work themselves free, creating more orbital
debris.
Once that satellite or rocket body ceases to perform a useful purpose, we may
c.onsider the entire system to be debris, and we should remove it for the sake of the
remaining operational payloads. We should add this mission termination phase to
the mission profile, using propulsive maneuvers to put it into a disposal orbit or reentry trajectory. We use disposal orbits mostly for GEO satellites, while reentry is
most economical for many LEO orbits. We must consider these maneuvers in the
design prOcess to control the growth of orbital debris. Regardless of our regime, all
energy sources should be passivated (e.g., fuel and pressure tanks vented, batteries
safed, and momentum wheels despun).
The design decision in response to orbital debris is basically a cost balance between
design and risk costs. As discussed in Sec. 19.2, the risk cost is the expected cost of
failure. This value is simply the probability of a debris encounter causing a failure
times the cost to compensate for this failure. This may entail accepting degraded
performance or launching a substitute. A, worsening debris environment may increase
the space segment failure probability (Sec. 19.2) which we can offset by changes in
design such as shielding, redundancy, or avoidance maneuvers. Each of these countermeasures exact a financial burden of increased direct costs (design and manufacturing)
and indirect costs (launch and maintenance), yet may result in greater reliability for all
space systems.

References

851

Hayashida. K.B. and J.H. Robinson. 1991. "Single Wall Penetration Equations,"
NASA TM-103565, December.
Jasentuliyana, N. and R.S.K. Lee. 1979. Manual on Space Law. New York: Oceana
Publications.
Johnson, N.L., A. Bade, P. Eichler, E. Cizek, S. Robertson, and T. Settecerri. 2002.
"History of On-Orbit Satellite Fragmentations." 11th edition, July, JSC-28383,
NASA Johnson Space Center.
Johnson, N.L., ~d D.S. McKnight. 1991. Artificial Space Debris. Malabar, FL:
Krieger Publishing.
Kessler, DJ. 1985. ''Orbital Debris Issues." Advances iT! Space Research. 5 (2): 3-10.
Kessler, D.J. and B.G. Cour-Palais. 1978. "Collision Frequency of Artificial Satellites: The Creation of a Debris Belt." Journal of Geophysical Research.
83:2637-2646.
K1inkrad, H., J. Bendisch, H. Sdunnus, P. Wegener, and R. Westerkamp. 1997. "An
Introduction to the 1997 ESA MASTER Model." in Proceedings of the Second
European Conference on Space Debris, Darmstadt, Germany, March 17-19, 1997,
W. Flury, ed, ESA SP-393, May, pp. 217-224.
Liou, J.C., MJ. Matney, PD. ADZ-Meador, D. Kessler, M. Jansen, and J.R. Theall.
2002. ''The New NASA Orbital Debris Engineering Model: ORDEM 2000."
NASAffP-2002-210780, May.
NASA. 1993. ''Policy For Limiting Orbital Debris Generation." NASA Management
Instruction (NMI) 1700.8, AprilS.
National Research Council, Committee on Space Debris. 1995. Orbital Debris: A
Technical Assessment. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

References
Christiansen, E.L. 1993. ''Design and Performance Equations for Advanced Meteoroid and Debris Shields." Int. J.lmpact Engineering, vol. 14, pp. 145-156.
Christiansen, EL., JL. Crews, JE. Williamsen, JR. Robinson, and A.M. Nolen.
1995. "Enhanced Meteoroids and Orbital Debris Shielding." Int. J.lmpact Engineering, vol. 17, pp. 217-228.
Christiansen, EL., J. Hyde, and O. Snell. 1992. "Spacecraft Survivability in the
Meteoroid and Debris Environment" Paper No. AIAA 92-1409, presented at the
AIAA Space Programs and Technologies Conference, Huntsville, AL, March
24-27.
Christol, Carl Q. 1982. The Modem International Law of Outer Space. New York:
Pergamon Press.
Cour-Palais, B.G. 1979. "Space Vehicle Meteoroid Shielding Design." Paper No. ESA
SP-153 in Proceedings of Comet .Halley Micrometeoroid Hazard Workshop,
Noordwijk, The Netherlands: ESA Scientific and Technical Publications Branch.
Goldman, Nathan C. 1988. American Space law, International and Domestic. Ames,
Iowa: Iowa State University Press.

National Research Council, Committee on International Space Station Meteoroid!
Debris Risk Management. 1997. Protecting the Space Station from Meteoroids and
Orbital Debris. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

Natural Orbital Environment Guidelinesfor Use in Aerospace Vehicle Development.
1994. B.J. Anderson, ed. NASA TM 4527. June.
Office of Safety and Mission Assurance. 1995. ''Guidelines and Assessment Pr0cedures for Limiting Orbital Debris." NASA Safety Standard (NSS) 1740.14,
August.
Reynolds, Glenn H. and Robert P. Merges. 1989. Outer Space, Problems of Law and
Policy. Boulder, Colorado: Western Press.
Taylor, E.A., M.K. Herbert, DJ. Gardner, L. Kay, R. Th~mson, and M.!. Burchell.
1998. "Hypervelocity Impact on Carbon Fibre Reinforced Plastic (CFRP)!
Aluminum Honeycomb." In Proceedings of the Institution 0/ Mechanical Engineers Part G: Journal ofAerospace Engineering.
Warren, H. and MJ. Yelle. 1994. ''Effects of Space Debris on Commercial Spacecraft
-The RADARSAT Example." In Preservation of Near-Earth Space/or Future
Generations, John A. Simpson, ed. New York: Cambridge University Press.

,

852

Umits on Mission Design

Yeomans, ~.K. 1998. "Comet 55Pffempel-Tuttle and the Leonid Meteors." LEONID
MeteorOid Storm and Satellite Threat Conference. Manhattan Beach CA Apn'l
27-28.
'
,
Zhukov, G. and Y.Kolosov. 1984.1ntemational Space Law. New York: Praeger.

Zook.. HR.• ~. Flaherty. and DJ. Kessler. 1970. "Meteoroid Impact on the Gemini

Chapter 22
Design of Low-Cost Spacecraft

Wmdows. Planetary and Space Sciences. 18:953-964.

Rick Fleeter, AeroAstro
22.1 Designing Low-Cost Space Systems
22.2 Small Space Systems Capabilities and Applications

Abilities oiSmall Space Systems; Emerging Miniature
and Low-Cost Technologies; Potential Applications
22.3
22.4
22,5
22.6

Applying Miniature Satellite Technology to FireSat
Scaling from Large to Small Systems
Economics of Low-Cost Space Systems
Annotated Bibliography on Low-Cost Space Systems

Until about 1990. conventional satellite technology focused on relatively small
numbers of highly capable. complex spacecraft. Recently, spacecraft have become
more diverse. with the largest spacecraft now complimented by new systems using a
larger number of smaller spacecraft in low-Earth orbit. While these are lower cost than
their predecessors, this chapter focuses on the lowest tier of spacecraft cost to examine
the particular methods and attributes characteristic of minimum-cost spacecraft. In
certain applications these lower cost, smaller, simpler spacecraft are more effective.
We will examine the tradeoffs between conventional technology and what is now
referred to as miniature satellite technology or microspace. We will also consider the
most successful applications for minimum cost spacecraft technology, as well as how
engineering of low-cost and miniature spacecraft differs from that of conventional
devices. Because modem, low-cost spacecraft design is a rapidly evolving technology,
there are few references. We have included an annotated bibliography as a guide to
further reading.
Ever since Sputnik in 1957 and Explorer in 1958, spacecraft developers have built
small, simple systems alongside large, conventional satellites. Miniature satellites fill
specific niches. especially for short-term missions with few users. A miniature satellite typically weighs less than 200 kg, has a shorter mission lifetime requirement, and
is put together quickly by a small team. With less money invested, and because a
minimum cost spacecraft has far fewer components and lower complexity, a user can
sanction more liberal engineering designs and be more willing to use newer, less
expensive technology, such as more contemporary electronic components or fabrication techniques.
The main advantages of miniature satellites are decreased costs and production
times. Military, university, commercial, and institutional space programs sometimes
cannot afford large, conventfonal spacecraft or take the time needed to build and
launch them.

853

855
Design of Low-Cost Spacecraft

854

Since they provide fewer, more modest on-orbit abilities, miniature products have
much simpler system architectures. They achieve reliability through simplicity rather
than through expensive, redundant components. They can be much smaller and lighter
than conventional products, thus reducing launch costs, which typically constitute half
the cost of a satellite system on orbit. Very small devices can often fill small spaces
available on large launchers. For ground transportation, one person can often carry a
small satellite in a car or on an airline seat.
Military applications of larger spacecraft are vulnerable to failure during launch or
on orbit, as well as to aggressive acts. We currently address these weaknesses mainly
with redundant subsystems, highly reliable components, and defensive countermeasures, all of which add cost and size. A miniature technology approach would be
to create many small, relatively vulnerable spacecraft, providing the same ability but
a more difficult target.
Small size is not in itself a new feature. The earliest satellites were very small out
of necessity, weighing 5 to 50 kg. In retrospect, it is remarkable how large satellites
have grown, not how small a few satellites are. Table 22-1 surveys a sample of the
small satellites launched from 1991 to 1995. Since 1957, larger systems, made possible by advances in the technolqgy of satellites and launch vehicles, have absorbed the
most engineering attention and resources. However, the continuity in their launch
dates shows that small satellites have played a role throughout satellite history, and are
still useful in specific applications.

TABLE 22-1. Selected Small Satellites from 1991-1995. (Continued)These sateDites are aD
under 425 kg. They performed their missions beyond their expected lifetimes, on
the average
Companyl

Companyl

Mass

Sponsor

Mo.

Mission

SateIJIta

Launch
Vehicle

(kg)

1991

1993
SCD-1

EnvIro/IIn9IIIa DaIa

115

Pegasus 13

NASAlAF

Tether ElIpeIImen1

57

Della II

Mar

SEDS1
ISESIALEXIS

RoocarCh

pegasust4

Apt

DoE/LANU
AeroAslro

109

Aug

TaIspaz!o/KaySef
TIlrede

TemJsat

Ocean andTrafIIc

Sap

SoulhKorea

KIIsat-B

Sap

Portugal

Posat-1

Sap

IntIrmIrCSIAMSAT

Eyesat

Sap

italian AMSAT
group

Dec

40ea

USSR

Kosmos 2125-2132

MlDIary Comm. SaIs

Mar

SOIOIDSI

CAO

Research (3 saIs)

70

Space shuttle

Jun
JuJ
JuJ
JuJ
JuJ
Ju/
JuJ
JuJ
JuJ

USAFIDSI

ISESIREX

Comm. Research

85

Seoul

OSi

ASTPJUghIsat

Comm. (7 mIc!Osals)

U. of Surrey

UoSAT5

CommunJcallons

49

Arlane4

Tech. U. Berlin

TUBSAT-A

CommunIcations

25

ArIane

BaD Aerospace

LOSAT-X

Reseerch

75

Della 2

OSI

ISES

Comm. Research

60

Seoul

ESIEESPACE

SARA

RadIo Astronomy

Z1

ArIane

Osc/CIT

ORBCOMM-X (VaSTAR)

Communications

17

Arlane4

OARPAlONRlDSI

ASTPlLIghlsat 1-7

LEOComms.

23ea

22ea

Aug

Japan/U.8.

Solar A (Yoko)

Research

200

Mar

DSI

CRO

Research (3 saIs)

70

Jun

USAFIDSI

ISESIREX

Comm. Research

85

Dec

Czechoslovakia

Maglon3

ScIentifIc

52

SL-B

Pegasus #2

PIane1my GeophysIcs

14

Cyclone

Comm. R9sealch

50

Arlane4

RernoIe SensIng

50

Arlane4

50

Arlane4

50

Arlane4

IIamsat

ComrrwnIcatIons

DARAIOHB Sys\eI1I SallrR

May

India

SROSSC

Gamma Ally Detector

106

IndlanASLV

Aug
Aug

MalralSurey

S80IT

Communlcallons

50

Arlana 4

Korean Inst. of
Tech.

KiIsat-A

Comm. Research

50

Arlane4

Arlane4

50

ZenIlh

1994
Remote SensIng

60

IIaIy

BARRESAT

TechnDIogyAndUlltrlal

50

France

ENSAESAT2

Research

50

France

CeriSe

MIIIaJY EIM!SdrDjIpIng

60

Energelfcs

SaItraCk

local PosftIon!ng

64

ArIane
ArIane
ArIane
SoWlt Proton

Tech. U. BerlIn

40

Bremsat

Space ShultIe

Getman)'

68

Feb

Research
Research

Cyclone

Jan

TUBSAT-B

OARAlOHB Sys\eI1I SaIIr R
SRQSS-C2
India

55

Zenft

May

ComrrwnIcatIons

113

ASLV

Space Tech Res Vehicle

ScIenIIIIc
Test New Tech. (2 saIs)

60

ArIane

STRV-1 a, 1994-034c,

52

Arlana

UK ORA

Component Testing

UKDRA

STRV-1b,1994-034b

Component Testing

53

ArIane

APEX. 1994-046a

Research

262

Pegasus

CorrununlCalionS

Paldslan

Jun
Jun
Jun

UKDRA

Aug

OSC

Dec

RussIa

RS-1 SA. 1994-C85A

Jan

RussIa

ASTRID, 1995-0028

Russi!!

FAiSAT-1,1995-OO2C

MexIco

UNAMSAT

RussIa
Israel

Apr

70

88-19 mIssIe

ScIence and Tech.

28

COSMO&3M

115

COSMOS-3M

12

SIart-1

Techsat-1

Forward ComrrwnIcatIons
Research
Test Momentum Wheels

55

Slart-1

OFFEQ-3,1995-018A

Astronornlcal experiments

36

OFFEQ-3,
1995-018A

ORBCOMMFM1,1995-01
& 1995-02

Global communications

47

Pegasus

OSC

MICA01.AB-1, 1995-017

Wealher

Pegasus

NASA

78

Apr

GFZ-1, 1995-02OA

ProgresS M27

Getman)'

20

Apr

PassIve RefIecIDr
Memory ExperIments

268

USAF

STEP-3

France

Cerlse,1~

SpaIn

ChUa

1995

Jan
Mar
Mar

M-3S2

ArIane

50

BAOR-B

Pegasus #2

1992
SARA

60

MonIIoring

Healthsat

Sap

May

Feb

Launch
Vehicle

Mass
(kg)

Brazil

Feb

an

TABLE 22-1. Selected Small Satellites from 1991-1995. These sateDItes are
under
425 kg. They performed their missions beyond their expected iifetimes, on the
average.

Mission

SatellIte

Sponsor

Mo.

Jun
JuJ
JuJ
Aug

Rocket
Pegasus XL

EavesdrOPPing

50

ArIane

UPM-SAT

Comm. Research

44

ArIane

FASat-Alla

Research

50

SlCH-1

856

857

Design of Low-Cost Spacecraft

Early Space Systems
The earliest satellites were small because the first launch vehicles' payloads were
limited. The satellites often had lifetimes limited by on-board battery power becaUSe
they had no solar panels. They carried either simple analog transponders or simple
beacons for researching signal propagation. The Echo series were passive reflectorS
formed of metallized polymer balloons.
.
Virtually all of today's satellite applications appeared in the first 10 years of
satellite development For example, the Telstar series first demonstrated television and
telephone relay. In size, mass, power, and orbit these satellites resembled today's
typical small satellites. They proved that satellite-linked TV was effective and
desirable, thus blazing the trail for the large geosynchronous communications
satellites in commercial and government service today. Several small Earthsurveillance systems had flown by 1967. The first weather satellite, Tiros 1, flew in
1960. VELA was one of the most successful small, Earth-observing satellites. Built by
TRW for the Air Force and Department of Energy and weighing 152 kg, VELA satellites were the frrst to provide data from space concerning nuclear weapons testing on
Earth. Though initially flown as an experimental satellite and developed by a small
group in 18 months, VELA provided years of valuable reconnaissance service on
orbit.
Radio amateurs were quick to see how they could apply satellites to communication
and education. In 1961 the 5-kg OSCAR I (Orbiting Satellite Carrying Amateur
Radio) Was the first of a series of satellites radio amateurs built and operated worldwide. Now numbering about 30 and spanning over 35 years, almost all of these
satellites have exceeded their operational design for on-orbit lifetime. The first commercial comsat, Early Bird, which weighed just 39 kg, was flown in 1965.
Continuing Applications of Miniature Satellite Technology
Between 1965 and 1985, space-faring nations deemphasized small satellites in
favor of getting the most sophisticated performance from on-orbit resources. Because
the United States was committed to crewed flight, including the lunar landing, we
developed large boosters. Larger boosters also became available for placing large
payloads into geosynchronous orbit, revolutionizing global communications and
creating the infrastructure in place today.
As space systems rapidly grew in size, vigorous small satellite programs continued
but without much attention from either the public or mainstream aerospace engineering. For example, several amateur radio satellites were developed using technologies
and design approaches previously untried in spacecraft. They also continued to apply
simpler, less expensive devices which were rapidly vanishing as satellites became
larger and more complex. These small satellites employed photovoltaics to charge
NiCd batteries for on-orbit lifetimes of several years. They carried VHF, UHF, and
microwave transponders and had a range of operating modes controlled by ground
command.
Small satellites often played a role behind the scenes in developing military systems. Very small devices were routinely flown to provide on-orbit targets and signal
sources for tracking systems. These satellites usually carried active sensors which
sensed their RF and optical environment and relayed the data back to ground stations.
Many nations have entered the space community through launches of small satellites, including Canada, France, Italy, England, Korea, Portugal, Sweden, Denmark,
UK, Israel, Spain, Argentina, Chile, Mexico, Malaysia, Denmark, Japan, Germany,
Czechoslovakia, India, and The Netherlands.

Modem Low-Cost Systems
By 1985, amateur satellites such as OSCAR 10 and UoSat 2/0SCAR 11 had
demonstrated the value of reliable digital communications to small satellites.. As Telstar clearly showed, we can use a single small satellite in low-Earth orbit only when
the ground station can see it; its ability to communicate was limited. To overcome this
problem. OSCAR 10 employed digital store andforward communications. using the
small satellite platform as a mailbox or bulletin board. Users anywhere on Earth could
tranSmit prepared messages to the satellite during its brief overhead pass. !he satellite
could then deliver these messages throughout the world. Conseque~tly, a smgle~ small.
inexpensive satellite in low-Earth orbit provided global mail semce-something not
even a large geosynchronous satellite can do.
This new operating mode began at the same time that NASA extended its Get Away
Special program to release small payloads into orbit NASA's pro~ had provided
inexpensive transportation into space for small « 68 kg). self-contained payloads.
Replacing ballast used to balance the Space Shuttle's major payloads, the program had
carried payloads fixed to the payload bay wall on roundtrips to orbit Goddard Space
Flight Center developed a Get Away Special container with an opening lid and a
spring ejection system. This allowed orbital insertion of a 68-kg satellite for less ~an
$50K. The European Ariane rocket had independently developed the ASAP (Ariane
.Structure for Attached Payloads). Up to 6 smaIl satellites could be carried aboard the
ASAP ring, each with mass up to 50 kg. Several Amsat and university sate~i~, as
well as spacecraft developed under national R&D programs for a range of applications
have since flown on ASAP. Due to the popularity and success of the ASAP program,
it has been expanded for Ariane V. accommodating physically larger payloads with a
mass of up to 100 kg. (For further details see London [1996]). .
Thus. small. inexpensive satellites reentered the aerospace mamstream through the
confluence of three developments:

• Low-cost access to space
• Highly capable digital communications systems whose weight, power, and
volume were compatible with the Get Away Special
• Digital store and forward communications
Radio amateurs exploited the concept of a digital mailbox in a small. low-cost
satellite to communicate with relief workers in remote parts of the world. The same
technology was a fundamental feature of the University of Northern Utah's N~at,
which was designed to calibrate FAA air traffic control radars and to be ~. educational
tool at the University. A similar application drove the Global Low OrbJttng Message
Relay (GLOMR) satellite's ability to carry data from remotely located sensors to a
central command post
The success of these low-cost satellites caused designers to reassess the roles of
large and smaIl space systems. Some payload organizations quickly reco~ that
the ability to fly a simple, small payload with low cost and fast turnaround was Ideally
suited to their needs. These first-generation users included scientific programs and
smaller national programs that could not justify the resources required to fly a conventional technology project. Israel's Offeq satellite, launched in ~ct~. 1988,
represents this facet of miniature technology. Today the s~-satelli~ mdustry focuses on special niches to satisfy missions that conventional satellite technology
cannot cover with larg~ spacecraft and multiple payloads. developed in programs
spanning 5 to 15 years.

858.

Design of Low-Cost Spacecraft

22.1

The ALEXIS (Array of Low-Energy X-Ray Imaging SenSOIS) 120 kg satellite, bUilt
in 1989 and launched in 1993, was representative of the increasing utility afforded by
small,low-cost satellites. The payload required anti-Sun orientation with a slow 2-rplll
roll about the Sun axis. This special stabilization requirement, plus the need for observation times of one month to one year, made this payload incompatible with larger
spacecraft catering to multiple payloads. The ALEXIS spacecraft bus, developed for
Los Alamos National Laboratory, weighs only 45 kg without its payload of scientific
instruments and costs about $3M. Yet it supplies 55 W of continuous power to the
payload, buffers 1 Gbit of science data between downlinks to a single ground station,
provides all spacecraft guidance and position data, and offers telemetry down and
uplinks at 750 and 9.6 kbitls respectively. Built for a 6-month on-orbit mission
ALEXIS has provided over 6 years of on-orbit science operations and remains in continuous operation as ofmid-I999.
Chemical Release Observation canister (eRO), another advanced miniature satellite program, is a group of three small satellites, each carrying 25 kg of hydrazinic
chemicals. Designed to eject the liquid chemical for optical observation from the
ground and from the Shuttle, the satellites provide simple telemetry of the payload
state (temperature and pressure) and respond to various ground commands. The satellites are aerodynamically stabilized to weathercock and fly oriented along their velocity vector. Built and flown for under $IM each, CRO was a highly successful
application of a minimum cost spacecraft.
Since the success of the OSCAR 10 satellite in 1983, miniature technology has
become an increasingly important element of hardware programs and systems architecture studies. OSCAR 10 provided analog and digital communications from a
Molniya orbit to amateur radio operators for about 14 years. Since 1965,OSCARseries satellites built by volunteer developers with limited budgets have demonstrated
part of the potential of miniature satellite technology.
Figure 22-1 addresses one reason· these small systems have become so important
The dramatic miniaturization of the electronic components composing most satellite
payloads implies that the spacecraft could do as much or more while becoming
smaller. But conventional satellites have increased their mass by three orders of magnitude despite the mass of some components shrinking by as much as four orders of
magnitude. Miniature satellite devices built with advanced technolOgy can do much
more than the very large, costly devices of only a decade ago.
Computers are another instance where miniaturizing has provided highly capable,
affordable machines. Miniaturizing has also changed the way we use these machines
and greatly expanded their applications. The computer revolution came about because
we thought of how to apply new technology in new ways. The technology is in place
to create a new class of small, inexpensive, and highly capable space systems. Our
challenge is to identify how to apply these new methods and products.

22.1 Designing Low-Cost Space Systems
Although we can design for low cost in different ways, some general rules apply
based on space-system development, launch, and operations costs. Launch costs are
often quoted simply as a linear function of mass on orbit for various orbit classes. This
simple model implies that achieving very low mass automatically minimizes launch
costs. But achieving low mass at low cost requires minimizing payload requirements,
redundancy, and size. By including the mission performance requirements as part of

859

Designing Low-Cost Space Systems

22.1

10 5

SKYLAS

g
!
::iii

104

•

HEA03 •

TDRS-A
with upper

10 3

FlTSATCOM •

stage

102
10
'

•

100

Vanguard

10'
1965

1955

1975

D

1 Mword digital memory

•

Conventional satellite launch

1985

FIg. 22-1. Electronics and Sate,,1te Mass Have EVOlved In Different Directions Since
Sputnik.

· process miniature technology tries to lower launch costs not by cost-saving
rath b
. . . . the reqwre.meots
measures applied to complex satellites, but
er y llUIUIDlZlDg
imposed on the spacecraft.
. .
will be th
ste
The single most significant factor driving ultimate mISSion costs
e sy. m
performance requirements. Unfortunately, these req~ments are ~ften ~temu:~
independently by the user organization before the design p~ocess .be~. This prac
is encouraged by engineers who complain that they can t design W1thO~~ ~ !O
d· t I The small satellite system attempts to provide a valuable capability ~~
ae:~ereO~t of volume, mass, power and comple:uty c~s~ts. Only by tailonng
requirements to that which can be realistically fit Into this limIted reso~e envelope
can the small satellite design exercise come to a successful result Typical tradeoffs
which should occur in the early phases of the design ~ess include ~~ da~
storage and downlinking in favor of more onboard proceSSIng, reduced pombng
stability requirements vs. more adaptive sensors and actuators, and redrn:ed power Y
careful design of payload instruments or ~u~on in ~uty. cycle, lea~g ope? the
possibility of a multiple satellite system which In combInabon can proVIde a higher
duty cycle and more frequent ground coverage.
.
...
.
Because launch resource is not a standard commodity, pnClDg In cost per umt mass
. . leading Very small launch resources, including the Ariane ASAP, Space Shuttle
~=~er ~d small payload space on most other ~jor ~aunch systems, often have a
single price per payload up to a maximum mass. Hitchhiker and ASAP payloa~
in general not mass but rather volume constrained. Thus, we need not s~d pa~ o~
development resources 00 very lightweight structures, ~~ :::etail~ an 6r.::
and testing needed to design and verify them. The stan
. tc
er carnes
for as little as $150,000. The resulting cost of $2,200 per kg IS about 10% of s~dard
launch costs on a per unit mass basis. Maybe more significantly, the total cost IS 0.1 %
to 1% that of larger spacecraft.
-'_ &I
"stand
W~ must keep in mind that these systems are secondary payloau~.lIoWD..
by" "and without a guaranteed launch date. If we build the payload to allow mnnmum

the de s l g n ,

a:

ar:

860

Design of Low-Cost Spacecraft

supJ?O~ at .the launch site, integration into a range of launch vehicles and

22.1

.

flexlb~ty In orbit requirements, we can minimize costs and program dela maxtmum

flighDedicated smalllallIl:ch facilities, such as Pegasus or Shavit. price laun%:~ace
t rathe: than per unit mass. Thus, we cannot save money by reducin mass helper
our allocatio~. In fact. because Pegasus and Shavit use solid propella!t. the mOw
c~ ballast If the payload mass is too low. As a result. we should avoid radical ~es ~t
c anges to shave mass, for these changes would require us to
d I
f
IgJl
unnec~ly on m.aterials, fabrication and analysis.
spen a ot 0 money
~educmg costs IS often erroneously associated with increasing mission risk. C
V~tiona1 sys~~ offer verifiable savings in expected cost of failure by low ?Dfail~lblprobability for an expensive mission. But if the program budget exceeds
aVaI a e resources, we may have to abandon the pro
Thi
. . .
mitigated by choosing missi.ons ru:hievab.le with a mi::nurit co!t:;=atic nsk IS
One way to save money m designs usmg miniature technology is to di
.
full redundancy, thus risking a single-point failure. But net risk may in f : WIth
for a small nonredundant system. This is because redundanc
.
. ower
switching mechanisms to arbitrate between elements. In ~r:.re~~~tion and
choose to back up only critical systems with known low reliabili In
oogy, we
~omponents each.having a success (lack of failure) probability R i'he o:e~tereml' °b~ln
Ity of the system IS
' 0>
la 1.

er::

(22-1)
~~nce the number of components, n, nominally scales with mass a minimum cost
s
space~ may have n 1% as large as a larger spacecraft. Thus' the small t
can u~ parts With 99.99% reliability and achieve the same reliabili~ as a large !y!::
spendmg much more money to buy parts with 99 99990'- reliabili'ty Or . th Y
art uali th li
.
70
"
usmg e same
p q ty e. ttle spacecraft will be more reliable. Thus the reliability gained .
larger system via redundancy is achieved in the smaller system through reduCti'om. a
the number ofparts In f; t arts &_!1
•
nm
liWure IS no longer the major cause of spacecraft fail"
. ac.. p
ure. Rather It IS human errors in design and operation whi h
.
th
increased'
,
c are m part e result of
, b'l'ty sYdstem compleXity. Here too, a 'smaller, simpler system has a significant
I
re la I I a vantage.
I
cti
..
~ pprodra ce: IDImatur~ satellite systems have an excellent record of success The
wor
~ction leader IS AMSAT, the satellite organization for radio amateurs
one of their over 30 satellites has been successful ov.... 35 years f d I' ery
"
V4
0
eve opment
programs
. spannmg m~y different development teams and missions. Their record
~tems oo:ectl,y from IDIDlature t~hnology's simplicity, its development process, and
Its orgamzational elements, as discussed below. Single-string design is risld
't
~omes more complex ..The relatively simple design and subsystems in Smallersaa:e:tes make them more reliable.
, Low-cost space vehicles must be small enough to he assembled by a unified u
~Ith common goals. In a small design team. every member of the grou has a ~
~ to every other member. They negotiate interactively and communica~ efficiently
e team members take the minimum risk path to achieve the savings they mutuall .
seek. ~e•. segmented development organizations have trouble working' this I Y
cooperative way.
m
c ose,
Theteamd "
..
d th Ea
esl~g a IDIDlature satellite must consist of engineers with breadth and
ep. ch specIaliSt needs to understand the requirements driving the overall design.

EV

li

Designing Low-Cost Space Systems

861

A small team can produce unexpected innovations because each member can appreciate the problems of other members. Teams suffer if they lose a key person. This vulnerability can be even higher in small teams because every team member is essential.
Managers of small programs need to ensure that each member works with a ''buddy''
who, though the buddy may be focused on another aspect of the program, understands
to some extent what the engineer is doing. In the event of loss of that engineer from
the program. the buddy can take on his or her tasks and responsibilities while the team
redistributes work.
A small organization trades resources freely across disciplinary boundaries. No
team member takes any resource for granted or "owns" an allocation. The program
manager communicates concerns about cost throughout the group. The efficiency
possible in a small group is so valuable that the individuals often work much harder
rather than bring more communications and management burdens to the program. The
spacecraft team can carefully explore and negotiate every systems-level requirement
with the users in order to show them how to save money. fleXibility on both sides can
cut costs dramatically. A small program should plan to invest in automated design and
analysis tools. These tools reduce team labor hours, but more importantly they help to
get the job done without team size inflating beyond the size (about 20 people) which
allows close team interactions. Similarly the project should plan to subcontract
specialized functions to keep the team as small, focused and interactive as possible.
A satellite program expends much of its resources on the ground station which may
operate two or three times longer than the satellite development program and require
expensive full-time staffing. To avoid the capital and maintenance costs for a large
ground station, it is best located at the user's site-preferably in the user's office.
Small satellites can be simple enough to be built around the user's personal computer
and operated as a computer-controlled. laboratory apparatus.
Technologies employed in the ground station include computing systems from the
consumer market. such as a PC-based station controller, read-write optical disc
archiving, and commercial input-output cards. Because antenna costs increase rapidly
with gain, we engineer the link based on the best antenna gain achievable at low cost.
Sophisticated ground-station software eliminates most of the need for operator interaction and provides a simple, user-friendly interface requiring little special training.
The computer is the only interface to the ground-station equipment. so the user need
not understand any other equipment interfaces.
The program review used to develop conventional satellites is inappropriate for
miniature satellites. For conventional program reviews, one person represents each
department while other members keep working. But for the smaIl satellite team, a
department" may be one person. Thus, for best efficiency, teleconferences and
smaller, less frequent Technical Interchange Meetings replace conventional reviews.
Usually, the members directly involved in a given issue meet; rarely does the whole
group need to attend.
Program costs depend on schedule about equally in large or smaIl efforts. But
because miniature satellite programs are short. delaying a few months can increase
cost significantly with respect to the total development budget Therefore program
managers must take the schedule seriously, always looking for means to finish and
launch the spacecraft as quickly as possible.
Like program management. quality assurance is a subfunction carried out within
the team developing a miniature satellite. No single individual or discrete organization
handles it The team works case-by-case in deciding on fabrication standards, compo-

862

Design of Low-Cost Spacecraft

22.1

nent qualification, or requirements for derating and previous flight experience. The
same is true for applying specific fabrication standards orfor inspections. This method
allows the system engineer to reduce or eliminate quality requirements if their cost
outweighs their contribution to the probability of success.
An example of selectively applying quality assurance standards is in the design of
a spacecraft mass memory, which contains single controller and input-output (I/O)
devices managing a large number of mass storage devices. Failure of one of the control
or YO devices is catastrophic. Because there are few of these devices, We can justify
specifying highly reliable, highest-grade (and hence high cost) components. On the
other hand, failure of one or even several of the many memory components is not particularly serious. Further, procuring many of these devices at very high standards is
expensive. Thus, we procure memory for much less money at lower standards of quality and reliability.
Occasionally, a key component not previously used in spacecraft may improve performance or save money. With lower reliability requirements and the flexibility to
consider parts individually, we can decide whether to apply the component, based on
the following:
• Whether its failure brings catastrophe or merely degrades operation
• How well we can simulate its space operation
• How much not using the component would cost in performance and resources
• Whether we can meet system reliability goals with it
Saving money in testing does not necessarily imply higher risk of on-orbit failure.
Here again the simplicity of miniature technology allows a different, more individual
approach. The program manager may opt to eliminate subsystem and component tests
in favor of a full system-level qualification. This decision does not reduce probability
of mission success. In fact, simulating the space environment achieved in testing may
be more accurate for the integrated system test approach because each part will be
qualified while operating with actual flight interfaces. The tradeoff is in program risk
vs. program cost. If many component or subsystem flaws exist, they are more easily
corrected at the subsystem test level. On the other hand, if few failures occur, we
should rely on the integrated system test, which eliminates long testing of subsystems
and components.
Miniature satellite testing should take advantage of the system's simplicity. Wherever possible, we should use the actual flight and ground hardware for all tests, thus
raising confidence that all system elements will acl!Jally work together in flight while
lowering investment in simulations, test fixtures, and facilities.
Every mission develops with overt or subtle political pressure to satisfy the widest
possible constituency. Conventional products typically carry a number of discrete,
often unrelated payloads supporting many users. But programs using miniature technology cannot bear the complex payloads or engineering and management interfaces
arising from this constituency building. To maintain the tight program staffing and
focus needed for close communication, we must control complexity. Further, unless
we limit spacecraft mass and volume, we may lose a launch niche. Increasing launch
costs pressure us to provide higher reliability through redundancy, formal program
controls, discrete quality assurance,. and increased paperwork and subsystem testing.
Instead, we should usually split demanding payloads into separate programs rather
than lose the advantage of miniature satellite technology.

Small Space Systems Capabilities and AppUcations

863

Earlier, we pointed out that trying to lighten structures beyond a practical minimum
mass made designs more complex without reducing launch costs. A conservative, simple design helps us avoid complexity in the miniature satellite program. The program
cannot support independent specialists analyzing various thermal, mechanical, stability, and other properties. Designing conservatively ~liminates detailed .an:uysis, thus
maintaining· the small development team and keepmg the program WIthin cost and
schedule.
We can also justify less analysis because the small spacecraft's physical dimensions support smaller therinal gradients. Simultaneously, their .vibration-resonant
frequencies tend to be high whereas applied moments are low, owmg to short unsupported structure lengths. Wall thicknesses typically depend more on screw thread
depth requirements and machining tolerances. Thus, designs often include substantial
structural and heat transfer margins. Finite element modeling can then be eliminated
in favor of analyzing the overall system and a few critical parts. Therefore, we can save
time and resources and need not hire more people to develop, run and maintain complex models and simulations.

22.2 Small Space Systems Capabilities and Applications
22.2.1 Abilities of Small Space Systems
Smaller space vehicles can support only one or two features of the most capable
survey
systems; larger systems dominate when we need many features. Thus, we
what small spacecraft can do with the caveat that we must normally custonnze them
to each user's requirements. Although we can probably increase a parameter's performance if an application depended on it, we usually gauge what is possible against what
has already been done or, at least, is in development.
Table 22-2 lists some of the common guidance and control techniques that have
special merit for small-satellite programs. Chapter 11 discusses satellite stabilization
in more detail. One option--no stabilization hardware at all--is a simple and therefore
attractive alternative for small-satellite applications. To achieve downlink margin and
adequate power in any attitude, satellite antennas need to have spherical coverage and
solar cells must be distributed over the entire satellite surface. Many conventional satellites require gain antennas for two reasons. Frrst, the satellite is in ~ high orbit :md
hence distant from the ground station. Second, the telemetry rates required by multiple
on-orbit operations increase the load on the radio link. We do not need antenna gain
or stabilization to operate small satellites only a few hundred kilometers above the
Earth's surface with a single, low-data-rate mission.
Passive stabilization, either aerodynamic, magnetic or gravity gradient, is often
used to minimize cost and complexity. Aerodynamically stabilized satellites are
simple but must be in very low orbit to be effectiv~. Beca~ orbital decay shortens ~e
mission life to less than one year, we should use It only In low-cost systems. GraVIty
gradient torques can passively stabilize. a sate~te in an ~~POin~ ori~ntati?D.
Small satellites have used this configuration for mcreased radio-link gam and unagm,3
of the Earth's surface. Permanent magnets may also stabilize a small satellite by aligning it with the Earth's magnetic field. This technique often comb~es with. spin
maintenance schemes using solar radiation pressure. Completely passive and highly
reliable, the technique can also allow about 3 dB oflink gain.

wi!1

864

Design of Low-Cost Spacecraft

22.2

TABLE 22-2. Guidance and Control for SmaD ~lIItes.
Technique
Unstablllzed

Typlcel
Performance

Advantages

Disadvantages

Example

Simple

No gain in antenna or
solar array

GLOMR

±10deg

AOgnedto
velocity vector

Very low orbits only

CRO

±10deg

Earth-oriented

Damping and upset
problems

uoSan

Passive
Magnetic

±3Odeg

No active
components

Limited to magnetic field
afignment

OSCAR 4

EartiJ-oriented
Spinner

±5deg

Earth-oriented for

Requires active control

OSCAR 13

Requires active control

ALEXIS

Aerodynamic
Gravity Gradient

Sun Spinner

NA

±2deg

part of orbit

Best use of Sun

Because most small (and conventional) space vehicles are not oriented to the Sun

an~ because ~cul~ting solar pan~ls are costly and complex, little electrical power i~

typIcally aV311able m small satellites. But power has not typically constrained the
design of small, low-cost spacecraft because they:
• Incorporate power management as described below
• Experience only intermittent contact with the ground station during typical
LEO orbits
• i?epend on the small satellite's large ratio of surface area to volume-i.e.,
smce power consump~on scales with volum~ (mass) but solar power by surface area, power reqwrements drop more qwckly than the power available as
size scales downWard.
Typical power management measures include:
• Using low-power devices such as complementary metal-oxide semiconductors
(CMOS) wherever possible
• Opera!ing digital components at slow clock speeds to minimize power consumption
• Duty cycling all components not requiring continuous power
• Con~idering directional ground station antennas to reduce transmitter power
reqwrements

Mos~ power ~stems employ standard spacecraft solar panels and either NiCd or
lead-aCId batteries. ~oSat E was the first small satellite to incorporate GaAs solar
panels as a means to Increase available power in a miniature satellite.) Often to control
cost, we fly commercial-grade commercial batteries in several parallel stacks. To reg~ate charg~, we ~ ~ simple current control or more advanced, digitally controlled,
highly effiCIent ClTCWts, ~pending on h~w much performance we must squeeze out of
a system. Much ~f the risk of employmg new, innovative solutions is unexpected
effects elsewhere m a complex system. The simplicity of low-cost spacecraft lowers
th~ risk associated with innovation. Thus, they often are first to employ new technologIes such as was the case with full-time digital charge control.

22.2

Small Space Systems Capabilities and Applications

86S

Power available in contemporary low-cost satellites ranges from a few watts in
unstabilized, Hitchhiker-sized spheres such as NuSat to over 60 W in Sun-stabilized
vehicles like ALEXIS. While scaling arguments favor small vehicles, the absolute
value of the steady-state power produced in LEO is typically small. Duty cycling
usually satisfies a payload's need for more power. Where this is not possible, the
power requirements can drive up costs, because the satellite must provide more solar
panel area, and may need articulating solar panels when the spacecraft surface is not
large enough.
Small satellites have provided superior information processing at a very low price.
Small satellites with prices under $5 million are equipped with DSP and Pentium and
Power PC microprocessors. Using static RAM or very low drain DRAM, the satellite
can supply several Gbits of solid-state memory to buffer data between ground station
passes while consuming less than 5 W of power for all systems combined. Satellites
weighing under 20 kg have given us a full range of onboa.'li signal processing: data
compression, error encoding, as well as data checking and decoding or encrypting and
deciphering algorithms.
Small, low-cost systems have flown with various telemetry and communications
systems, including VHF, UHF, and microwave links using PM and digital transmission ranging from 300 baud to 1 Mbaud. To obtain digital rates up to about 9,600 baud
duplex, we typically use non directional antennas on the ground and on the orbiting
platform as well as NBPM (Narrow Band FM). The short slant range to a satellite in
LEO has allowed us to develop ground units as small as a pocket calculator, which can
uplink and downlink digital messages. At the same time, directional dishes operating
at the S or X band can satisfy missions with requirements for very high data rates.
Maintaining low program cost depends in part on the designer's ability to minimize
data rate and bandwidth, which drive costs on the ground and on the satellite. As the
data rate increases, we need more expensive components and new systems elements,
such as a steerable dish capable of the high angular rates of LEO satellites observed
from Earth.
As discussed in Sec. 22.1, launch costs do not change linearly with payload mass.
In smaller vehicles, the actual cost will depend on negotiations with other payloads
comprising the full launch payload, because even a very small payload is a significant
fraction of the total. On larger vehicles, flying as a secondary, space-available payload
may allow lower-than-standard pricing. Special launch services, such as the Shuttle,
Hitchhiker and Ariane ASAP programs, fix prices up to a maximum allowable carrier
capacity. To spend less money overall, we need to survey existing launch resources
and build to match the largest number of candidate vehicles. In this way, we can get a
quick, cost-efficient ride on the fITSt launcher with available space.
Higher prices per kg are associated with small vehicles such as Pegasus and Shavit
because economies of scale favor larger launch vehicles. However, because a small
payload may occupy all or at least a major part of a small vehicle, the small payload
operator has more control over launch schedule and final orbit than when purchasing
secondary space on a larger rocket. Secondary payload accommodations being offered
by the Hitchhiker and ASAP programs are priced mainly to cover basic administrative
costs. The Space Shuttle programs offer an unusual value if we can live with the safety,
mass, and orbit limitations of that program. Ariane and Delta offer adapters to carry
many small payloads, and Ariane has Immched several AMSAT satellites. These
vehicles have well-established launch records and pricing structures well below small,
dedicated launch. vehicles. Both Ariane and Delta offer launches for commercial
payloads.

866

Design of Low-Cost Spacecraft

22.2

22.2.2 EmergingMiDiature and Low-Cost Technologies
Small satellites depend heavily on increased ability to compute and store data using
low power. An 8.5-kg microsat's capability today was unavailable in the 112-ton satellites of 15 years ago. Digital communicatious and large data buffers ushered in the
store and forward operating mode, wliich dovetailed with the communications architecture natural to LEO satellites. Advances in these same areas may further benefit
small satellites, but our fear of risk slows applications of new technology to space.
Particularly, concerns over the effects of radiation on integrated circuits in the space
environment have retarded the transfer of digital technologies to miniature satellite
devices. This partly explains why, as terrestrial machines transitioned to Pentium and
Power PC microprocessors, the first 8086 derivative was not used in orbit until the
199Os. Thus, we have plenty of room to apply advances in integrated-circuit technology to miniature devices.
Whatever progress is made in data manipulation and storage devices, many payload
devices will still have intrinsic power requirements which are hard to reduce. These
include radio transmitters, optical beacous, active coolers, and guidance and control
hardware such as magnetic torque coils and momentum wheels. Better conversion of
solar to electrical power will enable advances in miniature technology devices now
relying mainly on silicon-based photovoltaics and NiCd batteries. GaAs photovoltaics
are becoming common on small spacecraft with even more efficient cells now appearing on the horizon. The major effect of improvements in technologies for photovoltaic
and energy storage will be to increase the scope of orbital functious which miniature
satellite devices can perform.
Often up to 20% of spacecraft mass is batteries. Lithium ion secondary batteries are
now transitioning into microsatellites to reduce mass and improve performance.
Momentum wheels are now scaling down in size, mass, power and cost to accommodate smaller satellites.
Advances in focal plane technology already allow very small satellites to carry
digital imaging over a range of detector wavelengths. Sensitive, dense focal planes can
enable high-resolution imaging with reduced objective lens diameter and poorer
pointing stability. Advanced techniques for compressing image data, as well as
increasing density of digital memory, will ease the burden of acquiring and storing
image data for later transmission to Earth. Commercial organizations and countries
now recognize that a low-cost satellite can perform meaningful imaging. This has
spawned the startup of new commercial imaging companies serving specific market
niches, as well as numerous new government-sponsored remote sensing satellite
projects.
As we continue to reduce electronics size, the aperture requirements will increasingly determine satellite size, mass, and, ultimately, cost Particularly, high gain
antennas, very fast, high resolution optics, and solar power collection, require large
apertures. Thus, a key technology will be development of low massllow cost deployable optics, solar arrays and antennas.
A satellite on orbit is a type of robot It is a device which carries out various physical activities under control of an autonomous, synthetic controller. As terrestrial
robotic devices become more capable, it is logical that satellites will become more
capable and more autonomous. This would enable new applications involving
extended periods of autonomy (perhaps for missions outside of the Earth-Moon system), intelligent interactions with other space and terrestrial objects, and coordination
of the behavior of large numbers of small satellites.

22.2

SmaD Space Systems Capabilities and Applications

867

While the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, the Air Force, and NASA
try to develop a new generation of launch vehicles for small payloads, no launch tech-

nology breakthroughs appear to be on the horizon. Organizations are working very
hard to create marginal savings in launch costs, and conventional, large vehicles
remain the most cost-efficient way to inject a satellite into orbit We expect no major
advances in launch technology in the next decade.
Until a few years ago, advanced designs for spacecraft architecture focused almost
completely on conventional technology devices. The recent attention paid to systems
composed of smaller, less costly components on-orbit is likely to produce new
applications better suited to them, such as missions requiring a network of detectors
distributed in orbit around the Earth or Sun. Previously, such concepts were dismissed
because building and launching many conventional satellites into different, highly
energetic orbits are expensive. Reducing launch mass by an order of magnitude or
more may make these missions economically feasible.
In general, anticipated technological advances in information prOcessing, solid
state detectors, autonomous intelligence and power conversion will all increase applications of miniature technology. As we discover new systems architectures and
develop new applications for satellite systems, miniature technology will take on
heightened importance in future space programs.

22.2.3 Potential Applications
An array of satellites in random, low-Earth orbits can provide fully connected,
continuous communications, as Fig. 22-2 shows. This fact has spawned numerous
satellite programs which divide into the Big and Little LEOs. Big LEOs offer real-time
connectivity, mainly for telephone but ultimately for very high bandwidth
applications. Little LEOs are one- and two-way digital message carriers, used for asset
tracking, monitoring and paging. All of the systems currently contemplated are constellations, meaning the spacecraft maintain constant position relative to each other.
The number of satellites in the constellation ranges from 5 or 6 in the case of some
Little LEOs servicing limited areas or with long latency-the time between passes
over a user location. Big LEOs with constellations of 24 to over 240 satellites are in
development In general, larger numbers of satellites can provide higher bandwidth.
Some of the systems use inter-satellite links to forward signals beyond their own footprint Others immediately relay communication from the user to a ground station
which feeds the data via the terrestrial network.
Unlike the constellations, satellite clusters consist of large numbers of satellite
randomly distributed in their orbit planes without propulsion to maintain fixed relative
to positions. These satellites are smaller and simpler than those in the constellations.
They can be fit into available space on virtually any LEO launch. In time, such a network would become fully populated. Computer modeling of clusters shows that 400
satellites in random orbits provide 95% global coverage and 100% coverage from
other orbiting platforms. Thus, the satellite cluster could support both point-to-point
ground communications and satellite-to-ground links. One significant feature of satellite arrays, either constellation or clusters, to worldwide communications from the military viewpoint is its intrinsic survivability. Destruction of 1 or even 20 of the cluster's
members barely affects the network's overall effectiveness. Presumably the smaIl,
simple, mass-produced satellites of the cluster would be less expensive than the weapon required to destroy them. Their small-size would make them intrinsically difficult

Design of Low-Cost Spacecraft

22.2

22.3

Applying MIniature Satellite Technology to FireSat

869

Particularly for solar observations, the desired trajectory energy is quite high, so we
need low satellite mass. Small satellites are ideally suited for this class of
mission-requiring many spacecraft inserted into energetic trajectories. Due to the
scientific nature and high launch costs of such missions, they are best suited for NASA
and other national science and research organizations.

22.3 Applying Miniature Satellite Technology to FireSat

Fig. 22-2. Satellite Cluster. Many small satellites in randomly distributed low-Earth orbits can
provide point-ta-point global communication.

to track and would also pennit fabrication from materials transparent to radar. Their
intrinsic redundancy and graceful degradation justify applying inexpensive, singlestring design and fabrication techniques which will further reduce cost.
Another application of small satellites is for low-cost imaging. These systems use
advanced focal-plane technologies to obtain fine optical resolution with relatively simple guidance systems. By using multiple satellites in clusters or constellations,
frequent image updates can be combined with good ground resolution. SniaIler, lowcost satellite can be optimized to specific applications such as agriculture, coastal zone
management or land use and taxation. Several businesses and countries are developing
systems that will eventually eliminate the monopoly of a few large government-owned
systems on optical space surveillance of Earth-bound activities.
AMSAT and several commercial and government organizations are developing or
using small satellites in geosynchronous orbits. AMSAT plans to supplement existing
global digital communications from LEO satellites with real-time digital and analog
communications. Indostar is the first of a new generation of geosynchronous satellites
supporting only a few transponders. These small geosynchronous comsats could serve
as on-orbit spares. Moreover, they appeal to smaller corporate and national users
which cannot themselves support a conventional GEO comsat. These users must now
either lease individual channels of a large satellite or become a member of a conglomerate such as Intelsat. Using miniature satellite devices with lower capability and price,
smaller users can own and hence control the entire space asset, increasing their autonomy and security. Though GEO launch costs traditionally are high, small satellites can
hold down those costs by piggy-backing on a GEO neighbor's launch, if available.
However, few small satellites can take advantage of the GEO orbit. .
Measurements of rapidly varying fields over astronomically significant baselines is
impossible with a single satellite. By the time the satellite flies across the region of
interest, temporal variations in the field distort the map. By flying tens to hundreds of
very small satellites in varying trajectories, we can observe such phenomena as the
charged-particle environments and magnetic-field variations of the Earth and Sun.

To show how the small satellite conceptual process works, we will look at the
application of miniature technology to the FrreSat problem of detecting and monitoring forest fires either nationally or worldwide. This system is challenged to provide
rapidly updated data on a firefront's genesis, topology and local progress to the Forest
Service's central office: A network of low-flying reconnaissance spacecraft could
resolve the firefront to a few meters through multispectral imagers. Then the satellite
could find the spread rate by staring at the front during a pass and applying image
processing techniques to the downlinked data. Direct broadcast to the field through a
geosynchronous comsat would forward the derived data to the firefighting teams. Such
a system would be highly complex and costly. We believe that this system does not
exist because conventional satellite technology cannot ,meet the user's recognized
requirements at an affordable price.
Serious forest and brush fires often begin with a simple match or a spark that is hard
to see from an orbiting platform. One potential solution is to fly very low-resolution
imagers filtered to the near IR. Data on nascent fires would be downlinked to a simple
ground station which could reconstruct the low-resolution images and compare them
with ground truth, such as the locations of large cities and other bright areas. The low
resolution and subsequent low bandwidth will allow use of PC-based ground stations
like those already built for earlier small imaging satellites. This solution para1Iels the
conventional technology approach, but with minimum capability.
A more innovative solution would deploy simple thermocouple sensors from aircraft, with small nets to catch them in treetops, where forest fires spread. Fitted with a
lithium primary battery and a 1-W uplink transmitter, the sensor could simply tum on
(much like an Emergency Locator Transmitter) when its temperature reaches, say,
80 DC, broadcasting its digitally encoded serial number to a simple small satellite for
digital messaging.
After discovering a forest frre, monitors would dispatch an aircraft to the firefront
to drop a denser network of more sophisticated sensors. These sensors could transmit
the local temperature and their own ID number to the aircraft, which would maintain
a map of the sensor locations by recording them as each sensor is dropped. As the satellite overflew, it would receive the signals of the upgraded sensors, causing it to
rebroadcast a map of sensor ID numbers and temperatures to the local firefighting
crew. Their ground station would receive a map of sensor ID numbers and locations,
so they could immediately derive a temperature contour map. Figure 22-3 shows the
complete system.
A simple treetop sensor would be inexpensive because it consists of only a beacon,
a battery and a thermocouple. Dispersing the sensors could occur during routine
transportation and patrol flights because the sensors are merely scattered. The satellites serving this application would be very small, simple devices, which any sort of
launch vehicle could launch. All firefighting crews would need small, portable ground
stations, and the aircraft deploying sensors would use GPS to record location when

870

Design of Low-Cost Spacecraft

Basagruund _ _ _

__

~

WIdely dispersed monIIot sensors

i

Densely dispersed active lim sensors

22.4

Scaling from Large to Small Systems

871

spacecraft needs only modest capabilities to detect and mouitor forest fires. The satellites need only listen for beacons and crudely locate them to within a few kilometers
or tens of kilometers. In the second mode of operation, at the fJrefront, the uplinked
data from even a few thousand beacons is much less than· 1 Mbit.
.
The 13-cm Microsat cube developed and flown successfully by AMSAT North
America and shown in Fig. 22-4 is an example of the type of miniature technology
device which can meet all of the satellite requirements for .the FireSat mission. The
microsats weigh only 8.5 kg and are fitted typically with 8 Mbits of RAM. The unstabilized satellites carry omnidirectional antennas providing sufficient link to recognize
a low-bandwidth, O.S-W beacon at the Earth's horizon from 800-km orbit.

~""

uslng_o/_(~)

FIg. 22-3. Flresat System Concept The miniature sateDJte concept for a AreSat system
minimizes on-orbit cost by using an array of sensors for monitoring and for relaying
information about particular fires to firefighters.

dropping each high-resolution sensor. A laptop computer would allow an operator to
enter data as the sensors drop. The ground control stations consist of little more than
the field units, a small computer, transmitter, receiver and omnidirectional antenna.
The system described above would provide the following:
I

• Global monitoring of new forest fires from a few ground stations located anywhere on Earth
• Ability to locate fJrefronts to treetop resolution after identifying a fightable
blaze
• Communication of the fire progress directly to the field commander
With this approach, we benefit from minimal on-orbit requirements, cheap replacement, and built-in redundancy. With several satellites on orbit, if one fails, the system
degrades only slightly. Any launch to LEO can potentially rebuild the system. Suppliers of miniature satellites can put needed spacecraft on orbit in under a year, and the
system could be operating 18 months after contract go-ahead.
Note that in this example miniature satellite technology is considered a systems
architecture discipline. This designation is accurate and intentional. Miniature technology is not a special set of technologies used for building conventional capabilities
into small, cheap boxes. It is a new way of looking at an application to develop a
solution which doesn't require conventional technology and which a closely-knit team
of under 20 satellite engineers can handle. Using miniature technology architecture, a

FIg. 22-4. MlcroSat Cube Developed by AMSAT North America. This 13-cm, 8.5-kg satellite
first flown in 1990 could meet the space segment requirements for the RreSat concept
shown in Ag. 22-3.

Even in small quantities these satellites can be produced for less than $400,000,
because they are so simple. By using several satellites, the system itself is redundant,
so each satellite can be simpler, less reliable, and of a single-string design. Lower
reliability requirements allow us to procure commercial-grade components without
special ordering, testing or quality assurance. With this method, we can buy parts
cheaper and design more efficiently by using more modem, capable components. We
can also cut engineering time spent finding qualified parts and working with vendors
to meet program specifications.
Simple mission requirements allow the satellites to be quite small, thus greatly
reducing launch and ground-support costs. In fact, we can transport them to a test or
launcb site by commercial airliner as carry-on luggage.

22.4 Scaling from Large to Small Systems
The fact that miniature technology devices tend to be physically small means that
pbysical sealing laws will account for some fundamental differences between miniature and conventional satellite devices. A conventional device can also be physically

872

Design ofLow-Cost Spacecraft

22.4

small; this section addresses only the engineering differences which become significant when we develop a very small spacecraft.
As illustrated in Fig. 22-5, scaling up a simple cylindrical satellite by factor 5 in
linear dimension increases its projected area by 25 and its volume by 125. If we
assume that mass and power consumption are roughly proportional to the volume of
electronics, this simple geometric scaling has implications for the systems designer.
As satellite size decreases, its power requirement decreases faster than its projected
area. So smaller satellites typically do not need deployable solar panels.

a:.'
ProJecIed

Economics of Low-Cost Space Systems

22.5

873

structure, guidance, and propnlsion than the geosynchronous comsat. Palapa B, which
uses conventional technology. Only 21.5% of OSCAR 13's weight carries payload
electronics compared with 34.5% of Palapa B's. We cannot precisely compare large
and small satellites because their missions and operating conditions are so different.
But Fig. 22-6 shows that the key to miniature systems is not a new technology or trick
which allows its practitioners a special advantage over conventional systems. It is a
systems discipline which allows its engineers to meet a user requirement cheaply and
quickly despite its inherent disabilities.

ProjecJ8d

OSCAR 13 WIO Propenant

Area =25

M=1

21.5%

0=1

~

OSCAR 13, at 85 kg
dry mass, is 16% as
Jarge as Palapa 8
(530 kg dry).

1=1

1=3125

FIg. 22-5. Effect of Scaling Up a Simple Cylindrical Satellite. D Is the linear dimension, Mis
the mass, and lis the moment of inertia.

As we have mentioned, physically short thermal and load paths characteristic of
smaller satellites usually allow less critical thermal and structural design. The small
satellite of linear dimension 1 has to conduct 1 unit of heat flux over a maximum
distance 0.5. The larger satellite must conduct 125 units of heat flux over a maximum
distance of 2.5, requiring roughly 125 times more temperature difference between the
satellite surface and interior. Presumably, thicker structural members in the larger
satellite partly offset this difference, but satellite thermal considerations rarely affect
structural design very much. Similarly, supporting the satellite from its edges (for
example) resnlts in much thicker structure relative to size for a large satellite than for
a small one. This advantage to small size diminishes somewhat because wall thicknesses in very small devices often depend on machining and handling limits. Thus, we
cannot build the small satellite to theoretical structural limits, so it tends to be heavier
and a better heat conductor than it wonld be if designed optimally for strength.
The thermal and structural oversizing typical of small satellites tends to affect
programs positively and negatively. Miniature technology devices tend to be built to
exceed specifications, so they require very little analytical effort to ensure their structural and thermal integrity compared with conventional technology devices. Also they
rarely require special, costly thermal and structural materials and devices such as high
strength alloys, composites, or heat pipes.
On the other hand, miniature technology devices support the operational payload
on orbit less efficiently because of design expediency and difficulty in manufacturing
very thin, light. small structures. As Fig. 22-6 illustrates, OSCAR 13, a miniature technology comsat, has much more of its mass devoted to support fimctions such as

OSCAR's relatively
simple, ±1° spin
stabilized G&C
system Is nonetheless almost twice
as large, relative to
overall mass, as
Palapa 8's full three

EI Payload
IIIIIITT&C
\ll.B Structure
(iJ PropuJsIon
II] Power

lSI Guidance
[J Thermal

axis system.

34.5%

FIg. 22-6. Comparison of Satellite Mass Efficiency. Comparison of OSCAR 13 with Palapa 8
illustrates the d"lffIculty in scaling spacecraft G&C systems for sman satenites.

22.5 Economics of Low-Cost Space Systems
To survive as an industry, low-cost space systems must be more cost effective than
space- and ground-based alternatives. To confirm savings, we must verify that we can
complete and fly hardware successfully at low cost. The value to the user must be at
least as large in proportion to cost (including accounting for risk) as competing alternatives, such as conventional technology.
Experit<nce in some of the more recent small satellites illustrates the ran~e of costs
which can be expected in a small satellite program. Table 22-3 lists approxunate program costs for some small satellites (in 1990 dollars).

874

Design of Low-Cost Spacecraft

22.5

22.S

Economics of Low-Cost Space Systems

875

TABLE 22-3. Cost Experience for Selected Small Space Systems.
Mass
Satellite

(kg)

Stabilization

OSCAR 10&

100

Spin

Developer
AMSAT

13
CRO

70

Aerodynamic DoElUSAF

GLOMR

68

None

DARPA

Approx.
Cost

Comments

Year

$250,000 All volunteer
engineering staff

1981
...- - - 5x Higher Pointing Ace: $6.1 M
. 1980

$lM
$lM

Cost includes ground
station

1986

Cost includes ground
station

1993

45

Spin

DoE

UoSat E (typJ

61

Gravitygradient

U. of Surrey

Microsat

8.5

None

AMSATlWeber $200,000 Student and faculty
support

Indostar

600

3 axis

Orbital

SAMPEX

158

Momentum
Bias

GSFCINASA
Small Explorer

$35M

1st Small Explorer
Mission

1992

$70M

Lunar imager & first
detection of lunar ice

1994

$lM

$150M

Hi-Reliability Speciflcation: $7.5 M

..
4--

ALEXIS

$3.5M

...- - - - Minimum Cost Program:
Price:$2.0M

CommerciaVUniversity
Cooperative

FuU Traceability: $12.1 M

...... Formal Periodic Reviews: $14.5 M
~ Large Business Overhead:
Conventional Program Price: $17.8 M
FIg. 22-7. Conventional Satellites Impose Significant Costs over a Low-cost, Small Satellite Program. In this example based on design studies of a small astronomical
satellite, the development cost is $2M compared with -$18M for a conventional .
satellite for the same mission. Additional costs for test, ground station, and on-orbit
operations will further widen the cost gap between the two approaches.

Preliminary Cost
Estimate

Clementine

424

3 Axis

NRUlLNU
BMDOINASA

ASTRID 1&2

27

Spin

Swedish Space
CorpJSNSB

$l.4M"

HETE

120

3 Axis

MITIAeroAstro

$12M"" Gamma ray burst
detection. Launch
vehicle failure.
Awaiting refJight.

1996

NEAR

805

3 Axis

JHUlAPL
NASA

$150M

Asteroid Rendezvous

1996

SAPHIR-2

55

Gravitygradient

OHBSystem
(Germany)

Communications:
messaging

1998

Earth & Space Physics 1995&
1998

"Includes launch
'"Includes ScIence Instruments, BUS and Multiple Ground StatIons

We can easily survey small-satellite programs and demonstrate their low cost
compared with conventional satellites. Understanding the basis for this cost difference
is more complex. The cost pyramid in Fig. 22-7 is one way of explaining the dramatic
difference between miniature and conventional costs for a small, astronomical satellite
proposed as a university research program to NASA. The pyramid tracks cost growth
in translating a hypothetical miniature satellite program to a conventional program
with similar operational specifications. The pyramid topology is apt because each
extra cost adds to the previous cost. Thus the cost growth is more geometric than arithmetic.
Starting with an initial satellite cost of $2M, we would establish a dialogue with the
scientific user group to try to reduce program cost while maintaining the scientific
value of the mission. This vertically integrated process leads us to modify operations
by relaxing the pointing accuracy, thus saving considerable money at the second stratum of the pyramid.

In this case, the user group had a fixed budget ceiling. Thus, as is ofteJ) true in
miniature satellites, the reliability trade off reduces to a choice between controlling
cost (at increased risk) and cancelling the program. The choice to accept industrialgrade components saved -$15M compared to space grade. Because small satellites
have 10% to 1% as many parts as larger spacecraft, part failme is less significant to
achieving mission reliability. Thus, small satellites· routinely employ less expensive,
more modem and more readily available commercial parts saving money via parts
cost, shortened schedule and simplified design. In some cases, contractors cannot easily purchase individual space-grade parts, so they must buy parts in lots and test them,
or use a more poorly suited component. Both of these options-in-house qualification
or redesign around poorly suited components-cost much more money.
Component traceability strongly drives up costs, because it requires a program
infrastructure, thus driving up direct and overhead costs. Direct costs increase partly
because subcontractors must attend to traceability, thus increasing the cost of supplied
components and assemblies. Traceability, like space-class specification, eliminates
many potential components, because mass-produced devices not already made to
space-class are not traceable. Industrial grade NiCd batteries are typical of this
dilemma. Only MIL grade and above-ten times more expensive-are traceable.
Extensive periodic program reviews are of questionable value at all project scales.
But a small team working on a miniature satellite project can save a lot of money by
substituting regular communications for formal reviews. Of course, we can keep the
team size down if we can avoid those earlier requirements, such as higher pointing
accuracy, S-class parts, and traceability. A program review for any sized program has
direct and hidden costs such as travel, time spent in meetings, preparation time, and
misdirection of the hardware team towards genemting paper rather than making hardware. But the penalty is more significant for a small program. Budget is often s~verely
constrained such that airline tickets and hotel costs are significant. But more lDlportantly, efficiency of small spacecraft development is in part rooted in the smal! size of
the team.. Additional burdens including numerous reviews and part tracking can
inflate team size. beyond that allowing very rapid, informal interactions or that
encourage optimal resource allocations.

876

Design of Low-Cost Spacecraft

22.5

Although the exact numbers in the cost pyramid are all estimates derived from a
study of system architecture, present experience with miniature and conventional pr0grams and contractors supports them. The interest in missions using miniature
satellites directly relates to this cost difference.
The above arguments notwithstanding, we still must show that particular missions
can be performed more cost effectively with miniature technology than with conventional technology. Clearly, to achieve cost and schedule benefits, users of miniature
technology must sacrifice some performance but also realize important gains in schedule. We cannot compare conventional and miniature products purely with numbers,
because they differ qualitatively. But the following example illustrates how miniature
technology can save money and increase reliability of an overall system.
A 50-kg satellite can be launched piggyback for between $50,000 and $IM,
depending on the launcher. The Pegasus launcher has enough payload to launch about
10 satellites of 50 kg each for $1.5M each. When we have invested little in the launch,
we can tolerate a less reliable satellite. A 9O%-reliable satellite built for $IM plus a
$IM launch investment (on-orbit cost of $2M) has an expected cost to 100% reliability
of
$2M + 0.90 = $2.22M
That is, to get 9 satellites working on orbit, we will need to build and launch 10, so
the effective cost per satellite increases incrementally. As mentioned earlier, engineering to increase reliability in a single satellite costs a lot of money. Numerous
subsystem assemblies and more complex control systems drive up these costs. The
most reliable components can cost many times more than their commercial counterparts. A 28V stack of space-qualified NiCd batteries with 40 W-hr total charge costs
about $40,000 and weighs 10 kg. The best commercial technology available from the
same supplier costs $180 and weighs 4 kg. At $20,000Ikg launch cost, the total savings
is $159,820. Thus, the cost ratio between high and moderate reliability systems is 3:1.
Of course, we should not use small satellites when we cannot reduce the payload's
size, mass, or support; the satellite will require a large fixed investment and a costly
launch. For example, if the FireSat needs an imaging system with an optical objective
of I-mdiameter, fitted to a steerable platform with arc-minute accuracy and stability,
present technology would make the system's mass well over a ton. Launch costs will
be near $4OM, and payload costs could be equally large. With $IOOM invested in the
system, the value of increasing reliability from 90% to 95% is $5.9M. Thus, adding
redundant systems to roughly double reliability can be quantitatively justified if they
increase costs less than this amount. Miniature technology is not appropriate for such
a large mission, regardless of reliability. For one thing, a group of people each charged
with understanding most of the total system could not fabricate such a large system.
The more bureaucratic approaches of conventional technology will work better in this
case.
We also cannot accurately measure the cost of failure simply by quoting orbitsystem cost (satellite plus launch vehicle). Some payloads are worth more than their
dollar price, the prime example being crewed vehicles. The value to society of preserv_
ing life is very high, particularly in a public government activity during peace time.
Also, even if we accurately measure the space component's cost, we can still underestimate the real cost of a failure. Many missions require coordination with other
valuable assets. Deploying and reconfiguring of space and ground assets for a space
test can require more financial commitment than the space vehicle itself. Lost oppor-

22.5

Economics of Low-Cost Space Systems

877

tunities are also quite costly. If a single, large surveillance satellite fails on orbit, we
may not secure continuous observation, thus losing politically vital data that is more
valuable than the on-orbit asset.
.
Ultimately, we must associate a cost with on-orbit failure, assessing severa11ev~ls
of reliability in terms of program cost, complexity, and schedule. We can then ~de
whether to build to reliability requirements. In comparing a spectrum of candidates,
we must remember that cost and reliability may not relate directly. A much smaller,
simpler spacecraft, built by a very small group whose members are f~ar ~th the
whole system can be more reliable than a much more complex solution despIte the
latter's more reliable parts and redundancies.
. . . .
Other non-econornic factors also playa role in selecting conventional over lDlmature technology. Risks in program management often deter designers from applying
. miniature technology. The person who must deploy a one-of-a-J?n~ sp~ vehicle may
know that the final price will be unimportant so long as the lDlSSlon IS a success. <?r
conversely, he or she understands that a failure, no matter how cheaply executed, IS
still a failure. Wise program managers use miniature satellite methods for smaIl, relatively simple applications, not for highly complex ~~ion~ re.lyin.g upon large teams.
Launch of many satellites also better follows probabilIty distnbutions.
We should not, however, overestimate the importance of single string design to the
cost advantages of small satellites. In fact, many small satellites have incorporated
highly redundant architectures. ALEXIS includes a highly redundant digital system',a
power system which is quadruply redundant and 3 parallel payload systems. DSI s
MacSats were virtually fully redundant.
Also important is the application oflow-cost approaches to ~ubsystems. The e~am­
pIe mentioned above of substituting commercial NiCd batt~es for space-q~alIfied
ones can save up to $IM in the cost of a 200-kg small satellite. ALEXIS cam~ ~o
custom Sun sensors built by AeroAstro, each for about 10% of the cost ?f eXIsting
space qualified units. Because they use less power, and ~ smaller and lIghter than
Sun sensors designed for larger satellites with more deman~g performance and q?ality specifications, their cost savings ripple thr?ugh. the en~ spacecraft bus desIgn.
The net savings in using simpler Sun sensors IS estimated m the case of ALEXIS to
have been several hundred thousand dollars.
Because the torques required to stabilize a small satelliu: are small, use of costl1
iron core torque coils is often not necessary.lnstea~ much SImpler ~d lower cost arr
core coils can be used. Typically this can result m $50,000 m savmgs for a small
satellite. When the design is correctly accomplished, a small satellite is not structurelimited. In fact. Martin Sweeting of Surrey Satellites has said !hat th~ diffen:n~e
between large and small satellites is whether a distinct structure IS ~quired. This IS
because small satellite characteristic lengths are short, and structure IS usually overbuilt due to manufacturing constraints (metal needs to be thick enough to su~port
fasteners and thereby becomes thicker than necessary tor purely struc~. co~slder­
ations) or because the mass savings of a weight reduction F~ ~n t Slgnifi~t.
In any case, there is a savings both in that higher cost matenals, mc1uding compoSItes,
are generally not used, and little structural analysis is.req~.
..
Very significant cost savings are realized by specification of COmmercIal, mstead
of military or space, grade components. Savings result from several benefits. Of course
Mil-B and S-class parts are quite costly-sometimes 10 to 100 times more than the
equivalent commercial part lacking the qualification inspections and pa~ork. They
are rarely available in small numbers, since they are built and tested m separate

878

Design of Low-Cost Spacecraft

22.5

production runs. One integrated circuit, available for $50 commerciaIly, may cost
$500 in S-class, but may only be available in lots of20--increasing the purchase cost
to $10,000. Perhaps more importantly, the most modem technologies are seldom
available in higher grade components, forcing a compromise to inelegant design solutions. The HETE spacecraft, built to commercial specifications, takes advantage of
several modem, radiation-hard, semi-custom, integrated circuit components which
eliminate hundreds of S-class integrated circuits from the parts count Besides reducing parts costs by tens of thousands of doIlars, the modern technology reduces the
number of circuit boards, greatly reduces design, development and test labor, and
requires much less power. The savings in spacecraft resources of power,space and
mass, combined with the parts and labor cost savings, make the implementation of this
commercial technology worth hundreds of thousands of doIlars in savings to the $4M
spacecraft budget.
Some components CanDot be significantly altered for use on smaIl satellites, compared with conventional designs. As an example, spacecraft photovoltaics (solar
panels) have no market except spacecraft. In these cases, we try to work with traditional vendors to find ways to decrease costs. ParaIIeling the spacecraft design approach,
these may include using flight spares developed for other programs, reducing nonhardware deliverables (meetings and paper) and interactive design to produce a design
specification which is intrinsicaIly inexpensive to build and test Israeli Aircraft Industries' MLM division has succeeded in producing spacecraft photovoltaics at less than
half the cost per installed watt of conventional spacecraft photovoltaic systems, without any decrease in product quality or performance through application of these steps.
Formal engineering guidelines institutionalize conventional satellite technology..
The manager of a hardware development program that fails will not have to account
for the failure if he or she documents the program thoroughly and builds the system to
military specifications and Department of Defense guidelines. But program managers
using miniature technology employ untried components when it is cost-effective and
they perceive little risk. Yet, if their programs fail, they are accountable.
Thus far we have concentrated on two important motivators for application of smaIl
satellites-cost and unique capabilities. But smaIl satellites, owing to their simpler
architecture, the smaller team required for their development, and the smaIler amounts
of money required, can be built on very rapid schedules. AMSAT, motivated by the
availability of a near-term launch slot, produced and flew a smaIl satellite in 9 months.
With typical development time as short as 18 months, the spacecraft development
schedule is usuaIIy dominated more by the bureaucratic delays in getting a program
started, than by the time to engineer, build, test, modify, retest and deploy a smaIl
satellite.
Figure 22-8 shows that besides the quantitative shortening of the development
schedule, smaIl sateIIite development is a highly interactive process. Activity begins
when a particular mission is identified-in the case ofFiresat this could be the mission
to detect forest fires. In discussions between the user community and the development
group.in the ensuing 30 days, several very low resolution sketches of possible sateIIite
configurations can be developed, each tailored to different launch vehicles, different
size, mass, cost constraints, and different performance levels. This helps users to
understand the impact of their budget on the ultimate capabilities they can achieve. If
there is no way to get something of value for the user within the user budget, the pr0gram needs to be reconsidered and certainly there shouldn't be additional resource
expended on detailed design until at least a tangency between the cost and utility
curves is achieved.

879

Economics of Low-Cost Space Systems

22.5

o

3

6

9

12

15

18

21

•

24

Time (months)

Fig. 22-8. SmaU Satellite Development Program TImeline.

With a rough-order-of-magnitude budget in mind, planners can create a strategy of
spacecraft size, launch vehicle and capabil.ity ~ge. This loose se~ of ~~eli.Des then
forms the basis for a conceptual-level, engmeenng trade study. This activIty IS generally carried out over a month or so with a team .of.l, or at maximum 2, srstems
engineers with help from various subsystems specIalISts on an as-needed bas~. The
systems engineer should communicate frequently, no less ?ften than w~kly, WIth ~
user organization representative to review progress-particularly to discuss ways m
which relaxations of requirements can reduce cost and to explore newly uncovered
opportunities to provide additional capability without seriously impacting system
complexity.
. .
Only after the systems engineer and the user representative have explored this
envelope of architectural options and the capabilities envelopes, do we draft a final
requirements document drafted. This is important We do not achieve .the lowest possible satellite size and mission cost by a priori assignment of reqUIrements to the
satellite design.Just one especiaIly difficult requirement, ~ibly not vital to the ~~':f­
all mission, can result in a costly and unwieldy design. ReqUIrements and capabIlI~es
should be freely traded to reach a more global optimization of cost and compleXIty
minimization coupled with achieving the best systems performance.
Equipped with an interactively defined set of specifications and detailed sketches
of the spacecraft layout, along with weight and power budget estimates, the preliminary design process gets underway. Even at this very early stage, there will be
components which everyone knows wiIl be needed. Th~e might include an ov~rsup­
ply of NiCd batteries for later selection or the photovoltaic celIs necessary to build up
solar panels. Also, bids can be solicited for guidance sensors and ~~tors based on
estimated requirements. Also put on order any parts needed for building test fixtures

880

Design of Low-Cost Spacecraft

22.5

or circuits. Even .in a. smaIl, inexpensive satellite program, the value of beginning the
hardware flow IS high and the cost of parts ordered which end up unused is
small-usually it is nearly zero. By ordering that which can be ordered as soon as it is
i~n~fied. we s~d the parts procurement process more evenly over the program
lif~time: ~ compo~ents are unavailable or won't work in the proposed application, It s tmportant to discover the problem as soon in the design and development
process as possible.
e a}locate the entire preliminary and detailed design process about 7 months.
Fabncation formally begins, though by the Critical Design Review there should be a
lot of working hardware already in house. This will give substance to the CDR and
also allows the remaining fabrication of subsystems to be completed in an additional
4 months.
Six full months are allocated for integration and test. To have confidence in a
~ystem built ~th commercial components and possibly lacking full redundancy, test
18 ex~emel~ tmportant and there is no substitute for uninterrupted time using the hardware In vanous .mode.s--thermal vacuum, as well as desktop routine operation.
Launch readiness IS the last opportunity to resolve issues which have come up in
the development process. There will always be things which the team wishes would
have happened or not happened. The flight readiness review team must be made aware
of these concerns and must be ready to delay the launch if it detennines some deficiencies are not acceptable. Ideally the launch will take place immediately after the review
to minimize the temptation to "improve" the spacecraft.
A note on ~ogram delays may help. Interruptions in any program are always much
more destructive of cost and schedule than managers appreciate. In a small program
even more than a large one, the documentation is at a minimum and the focus of the
small team creates efficiency. To withstand frequent delays and the start-stop-restart
mode of many government-funded programs, a bureaucratic system is needed to docu~ent ~ork and co~unicate progress as new individuals are assigned to roles. This
will ultimately result In the small program taking on some characteristics of conven?onal, larg~ pro~ with :u>sociated lengthening of the schedule, cost growth and
mcreased dIfficulty m meeting requirements, particularly staying within the launch
vehicle constraints.
.
In s?mmary, .how d? we ~ow when to procure a miniature technology system? The
followmg questions WIll gwde our decision:

!f

w.

1. Will miniature satellite technology enable flying a mission which will otherwise be shelved?
2. Can some give and take be allowed between requirements and capabilities?
3. Is reliability achieved througJt simplicity?

~
22.6

Annotated Bibliography on Low-Cost Space Systems

881

8. Are many small systems preferred over a few large ones?
9. Do you want the user group to operate the ground facility?
10. Is the mission lifetime goal less than 5 years?
We mentioned earlier that ground operations can significantly affect overall
program cost. Often, the satellite's orbital lifetime is longer than its development
period, and staffing of a major ground station can be larger than that of a development
program for a miniature spacecraft. Miniature technology reduces ground-station costs
through its systems architecture and the ground station's design.
A low-cost satellite program cannot afford the luxury of ground stations staffed by
a separate operations group. Also, we may not be able to operate costly remote ground
stations. Thus, we need to build large spacecraft memories to buffer satellite data, so
the satellite can store data over long periods (typically 12 to 18 hours) until it passes
over a single ground station at the user's location. We also need to compress data on
the satellite, because ground stations with limited antennas and RF links may not support high data rates.
We cannot simply design the satellite to rely upon highly expert ground controllers.
The user organization typically does not know the special techniques of managing a
spacecraft. Thus, we need to use a single small computer to control the ground station,
so the user interface is a single machine. The ground station software should be simple
and well structured, containing on-line and written support. Where possible, we should
graphically represent the system status and the satellite orbit.
Whenever possible, the ground station should channel the user's activity toward tlte
right solutions. Furtlter, tlte ground station should be able to screen operator commands and activities tltat may adversely affect tlte satellite operations. When deciding
how much effort to expend on tlte ground station, we must trade the real costs of the
user group learning, input errors, and more people to manage tlte satellite against the
cost of creating more capable software for tlte ground station.
Autonomy is another important factor in the cost of ground operations. Satellites in
LEO pass the ground station a few times per day, every day of the year. While novel
in tlte first few days and weeks, years of tending tlte satellite at roughly 6-hour intervals can be a tremendous drain on tlte user organization. The ground station should at
least be able to buffer activities for a series of satellite passes. Thus, we should consider features allowing longer autonomous periods in tlte system design. An alternative
to extended autonomy is remote operation. A dial-in system permitting limited control
of the ground station from a remote tenninal can be valuable. Security is an issue in a
remote architecture, but we can devise various password and call-back schemes to
protect the system.

4. Can the flight hardware fly on a space-available basis?
a: Is the flight hardware buildable at < 400 kg?
b: Is there no special window required for orbit insertion?
5. Can the program management organization deviate from Mil-Specs and other
norms of conventional satellite development?
6. Can hardware and software be built by < 20 people?
7. Is there a significant benefit in a rapid schedule?

22.6 Annotated Bibliography on Low-Cost Space Systems
The Logic of Microspace, by R. Fleeter, combines an overview of tlte technologies
underlying small,low-cost spacecraft witlt tlte management and philosophy behind
tlteir development. It also provides a discussion of potential applications of small,
low-cost space systems. Published by Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht,
The Netlterlands and Microcosm Press, Torrance, California.

882

~ofLow-CortSpa~t

22.6

AMSAT, the radio amateur satellite organization, publishes The Amsat Journal quarterly and the AMSAT-NA Technical Journal approximately once per year. These
publications report program status and technical developments from AMSAT volunteers in North America. Write to: AMSAT-NA, P.O. Box '1:7, Washington, DC
20044.

The only textbook on small satellites, The Radios Amateur's Satellite Handbook, by
M. Davidoff, is published by the American Radio Relay League (1998). Emphasizing amateur radio satellites, the book provides a useful foundation in the technical
basis of small spacecraft. ARRL, 225 Main Street, Newington, CT 06111.
Also in the amateur satellite area, QST, the ARRL's monthly, occasionally highlights
particular small-satellite technologies for l\IIlateur radio. Examples are June, 1988
(Vol. LXXII, No.6); "Introducing Phase 3C: A New, More Versatile OSCAR" by
Vern Riportella. Also see May, 1989 (Vol. LXXITI, No.5) and June, 1989
(Vol LXXITI, No.6); "Microsat: The Next Generation of OSCAR Satellites" parts
1 and 2.
A special supplement to Vol. 57, No.5 of The Journal ofthe Institution of Electronic
and Radio Engineers was devoted to University of Surrey's UoSat-2.1t is a series
of papers on the satellite's design which provide an excellent view into the engineering of a successful MST device. Write to IERE, Savoy Hill House, Savoy Hill,
London, WC2R OID.
Proceedings ofthe Annual AlAAIUSU Conference on Small Satellites contains almost

all papers presented at the annual USU meeting. It is available from: Center for
Space Engineering, Utah State University, UMC 4140, Logan, Utah 84322.
1RW Space Log is a comprehensive compilation of satellites launched to date. Write
to: Editor, Space Log, Public Relations Department, TRW Defense and Space Sys-

tems Group, One Space Park, Redondo Beach, CA 90278.
Satellites ofthe World (Koredewa kara Sekai no Eisei) (in Japanese) by S. Shimoseko

and T. TIda contains an excellent survey of both existing small satellite programs
and several detailed concept studies. Available from the publisher, Nihon ITU
Association, Nihon Kemigaru Building, 7th Floor, Nishi Shinbashi, 3 Chome,
15-12, Minato-Ku, Tokyo, 105, Japan. Phone (03) 3435-1931, FAX (03)
3435-1935.
The SPIE now includes, as part of its annual program on Planetary Exploration, a
series of sessions on Small-Satellite Technology and Applications. Proceedings of
the 1991 meeting, edited by B. Horais, include papers on remote sensing and supporting technologies. Volume 1495 available from SPIE, P.O. Box 10, Bellingham,
Washington 98227-0010. Phone (206) 676-3290, FAX (206) 647-1445.
Space Almanac contains historical data on small satellites mixed with other general

space system information: Arcsoft Publishers, P.O. Box 132, Woodsboro, MD
21798.
The best sources of information on small satellite launch vehicles are the manufacturers themselves. These include Orbital Sciences (pegasus), Lockheed-Martin
(Athena), NASA GSFC (Hitchhiker onboard Shuttle) and Arianespace (ASAP
Secondary Payload Accommodation).

Chapter 23
Applying the Space Mission Analysis
and Design Process
James R. Wertz, Microcosm, Inc.
Wiley J. Larson, United States Air Force Academy
23.1 Applying SMAD to Later Mission Phases
23.2 Lessons Learned from Existing Space Programs
23.3 Future Trends

Since the first edition of Space Mission Analysis and Design (SMAD) appeared in
1989, substantial progress has been made in applying this process more broadly to
space missions, in part because of the continuing pressure to reduce mission costs.
With the exception of launch, costs in all segments of space missions have been
reduced. Launch costs, while not having succumbed as yet, are under attack from a
wide variety of directions. A large number of communications constellations are being
created that are bringing a more manufacturing-oriented methodology to bear, with an
emphasis on both lower cost and high quality. Even inteIplanetary missions are
becoming quicker and less expensive. The purpose of this chapter is to summarize how
best to make the SMAD process work within the real environment of acquisition
regulations, programs long past preliminary study phases, and the "new space" missions which we hope will be forthcoming in future years.
Much of this book ignores two of the major challenges to doing SMAD: organizational structure and the acquisition process. Both tend to introduce political and
bureaucratic obstacles to our goal of developing cost-effective designs. As described
briefly in Sec. 21.1, any space program exists within a broad and important context of
law, policy, politics, and economics which we must notignore. We are, after all, pr0posing to spend large amounts of som~ne's money designin.g :md developin~ space
missions. Even the best program has bttle chance of success If It does not fit mto tile
political, economic, and policy context that must support it. Politics can include, for
example, the need to have manufactiuing distributed around the country for publicly
funded programs or use of technology from specific companies for privately funded
ones. In any case, we need to work within these boundaries.
Our goal is to learn from past space programs and apply that experience, along with
our judgment of how to do it better. to new and ongoing programs. In practice, ,!,e
often end up doing things the way we have always done them, perhaps because It·S
worked or is simply easier to do than trying to change the mindset of individuals and
organizations. Introducing change is difficult in any venue, but we must change and,
indeed, may need to take more calculated risks if we are to drive down the cost of space
missions.

883

884

Applying the Space Mission Analysis and Design Process

23.1

This book develops space mission analysis and design through a series of process
tables indexed on the inside front cover. This process flow divides into three main
areas: high-level processes, definition of the elements, and detailed design. The highlevel processes develop concepts for the mission design. With these concepts in hand,
we can begin defining the characteristic elements of the space mission architecture;
Then we can design those elements in more detail. Table 1-1 in Sec. 1.1 gives you
simplified steps to begin designing your particular mission. Remember that success
depends on iterating and continuously improving the design.
.
We must caution you that SMAD does not work well whenever you need much
more than typical estimation accuracy. Our high-level algorithms and sanity checks
provide estimates for conceptual design. These estimates are enough in most cases, but
whenever performance is critical, or if you are approaching a technology threshold,
you should refer to more detailed information. Areas frequently needing more than
typical estimation accuracy are satellite lifetimes in low-Earth orbit, computer systems
sizing, and system cost modeling. Table 23-1 outlines ways to deal with these and
similar problems.
TABLE 23-1. Dealing with Areas Needing Much More Than Typical Estimation Accuracy.
1. Estimate as realistically as possible by working through succeeding levels of
the process tables outlined in these chapters.
2. estimate both upper and lower bounds.
3. Use conservative values and substantial deSign margin.
4. If control of a parameter is critical:
A Identify drivers during design.
B. Reestimate regularly as the design matures.
C. Develop and maintain options.
5. Be prepared to trade with overall system performance.

23.1 Applying SMAD to Later Mission Phases
Nearly all space missions must respond appropriately to the economic and political
forces acting on them throughout their design and operational life. At all stages of a
program, we need to achieve two critical goals:
• Meet bonafide mission objectives and requirements while minimizing
program cost and risk
• "Sell" the program and keep it sold, if it remains worth doing
The evolving political and economic environment may alter program objectives or
make the program not worth doing. Even though a program continues to be worthwhile, it may still require a significant effort to demonstrate the mission utility within
the ever-changing environment.
Minimizing Program Cost and Risk

Early conceptual design has a great impact on both cost and risk. However, costs
fluctuate (usually upward) throughout a program. Increased cost is frequently justifiable, but can also be due to unnecessary engineering changes, schedule slips, and

23.1

Applying SMAD to Later Mission Phases

885

changes in the funding profile. Thus, we would like to apply the SMAD process
throughout the mission life cycle to reduce, or at least contain, program cost and risk.
This process is summarized below and described in more detail in Wertz and Larson
[19%], Chap. 10.
Table 23-2 summarizes how to keep down cost and risk, but these steps can conflict
with how space programs are typically run. Good mission engineering demands that
we regularly review and consider revising mission objectives, requirements, and
approaches. However, this review may make the program seem unstable. We might
ask, ''Why are we looking at our mission objectives and requirements again? We have
already done that and now must build the system." We must do so because programs
and mission designs must mature and adapt to new conditions. Thus our concept of
operations, approach, and goals must also evolve.
TABLE 23-2. Mission Engineering ActlvHJes Needed Throughout the Mission life. These
are key to containing or reducing cost.
Action

Comment

1. Maintain well-defined objective

Ensure all engineering personnel know the broad
mission objectives

2. Revisit system-level trades regularly

Best done at beginning of each mission phass

3. Document reasons for choices

Does not occur in standard formal documentation,
but is critical to maintaining options

4. Maintain a strong systems engineering
group

Needed to continue developing lower-risk, lowercost solutions and to keep program sold

5. Control system-level trades and
budgets within the systems
engineering group

Allows trade between elements and applying
margin to different elements as needed

6. Update analysis of mission utility

Necessary to keep program sold In a strongly
competitive, cost-conscious environment

A major part of doing our job better is to identify the right issues and look for key
alternatives to investigate. Working the wrong issues can be costly. For example, early
in the U.S. space prograln, scientists and engineers were trying to figure out how to
handle the enormous heat generated during reentry into the atmosphere. At fIrst the
problem statement was, "Find a material that will withstand a temperature of
14,000 OF for 5 minutes." Much time and money were spent trying to solve this
problem even though no known material could withstand the required temperature.
Finally, someone recognized that the problem would be restated as, ''Find a way to
protect a capsule and the person inside during reentry."Ablative materials quickly
solved this problem. The moral of this story is to make certain you are worlcing the
right problems and asking the right questions throughout the program.
Returning to see whether we are meeting basic mission objectives does not mean
we will change the concept of operations 2 months before launch. The further, a pr0gram has evolved, the more it takes to justify fundamental changes. Still, if a new technology or concept of operations can reduce mission cost, risk, and schedule, we should
evaluate and use it if it is worthwhile. As the program evolves, the cost of implementing change becomes greater and the benefit decreases because other parts of the .
mission have been designed to work as originally intended. Nonetheless, changes late
in the program may provide equal or better performance at less cost and risk.

~,
II

886

Applying the Space Mission Analysis and Design Process

23.1

Although reevaluating mission objectives may appear to jeopardize a program. the
result becomes stronger and sounder. We could keep the same mission concept
throughout. but a far better approach is to formally review mission requirements at the
beginning of each mission phase. This review tells us where the program is going and
why. At the same time. it allows us to resolve these issues by the end of each mission
phase to maintain program stability within a highly competitive environment
Secondly. we must keep the program flexible by assigning economic value to
system flexibility. All too often. a program quickly becomes rigid by trying to
optimize the meeting of narrow requirements for the current mission design. Thus.
changing mission objectives or technology is difficult Hewing to fixed requirements
may reduce cost for a small. short-turnaround. unique mission. but is unlikely to
succeed for larger-scale activities. For example. geosynchronous satellites should be,
and usually are, designed to work in multiple slots so we can move them from one
position to another. Expressed differently. the mission design as well as the design of
the elements should be robust. i.e., stable in the presence of unknown perturbations.
We need robust or flexible designs to help minimize the cost and risk of unforeseen
yet inevitable changes in mission objectives and requirements.
One way to make a system more flexible is to carry out as many onboard tasks as
possible in software and ensure we can reprogram the software from the ground. Now
that we have more sophisticated processors and greater onboard memory, we-can create very flexible satellites without driving up cost and weight This allows us to both
correct design flaws on orbit and respond to changing mission needs and conditions.
Too often, programs attempt to reduce risk by flying only components which have
flown before. Many subcontractors change their design only when manufacturers stop
making particular parts and components. A far better approach is be to allow some performance margin and then use modem .technology to achieve the needed performance
at lower weight. cost. and risk. As Chap. 20 outlines, we also make an informed
assessment of the Technology Readiness Level of a particular approach, assign it a
documented risk factor. and feed that information into the decision-making process.
An excellent approach to minimizing the risk of new technology has been used
successfully by Surrey Space Technology Laboratory, Ltd. on a sequence of missions.
As shown in Fig. 23-1, Surrey continually flies both an older, space-proven computer
and a newer, more powerful one. This approach allows Surrey to have both a conservative flight-proven design to ensure mission success. while at the same time flying
some of the newest. most capable processors in space.
Keeping the Program Sold
History has shown that space programs can be cancelled in virtually any
phase-during conceptual design, during development and construction, after the first
one or two launches. or in mid-life while the spacecraft is still operating on orbit. The
message is clear: if the program is worth doing, we must keep the program sold
throughout its mission life. Doing so is straightforward.We must analyze mission
utility and trade cost against performance over the entire mission. We must also
maintain' a clear. easy-ta-understand and consistent rationale for mission objectives,
requirements and design decisions. At any time. we should be able to present a cost vs.
performance analysis and demonstrate to those who are funding it the benefits of
having the program proceed.
Maintaining an ongoing mission utility analysis capability means that we should
always be aware of the fundamental mission objectives and how well they are being

Applying SMAD to Later Mission Phases

23.1

887

General-Purpose Processors
1802

Z80

8OC186

8OC386

UoSAT-1
UoSAT-2
UoSAT-3
UoSAT-5
KITSAT-1

580fT
PoSAT-1
Healthsat-1
CERISE
FASat-Aipha

Fig. 23-1. Type of Onboard Computer for a Sequence of Surrey Space Technology
Laboratory mIssIons. Each generation of spacecraft typically files the old s1andard,
plus a new design which In tum becomes the next s1andard. (From Ward and Price,
Sec. 13.4 In Wertz and Larson [1996].)

met Thus. the mission objectives become important not only in the continuing design
of the program, but also in keeping it alive.
System Engineering Over the Life Cycle
Strong system and mission engineering should be maintained throughout the life of
the program: trading on requirements, reevaluating the basic mission concept. and
evaluating alternatives and mission utility. Otherwise the program may not continue.
Overall. mission engineering later in the program should proceed as outlined in
earlier chapters. At all levels. requirements should reflect what to do rather than how
to do it We want to let technology flow up and into the program where it can do the
most good for cost. risk utility. or operations. We are unlikely to achieve the mission
performance at minimum cost and risk by limiting ourselves to the technologies and
approaches from the concept-design team.
A key element in mission engineering is to document the main system trades and.
especially, the reasons for choices. Unfortunately, specifications demand only that
you state what the system must do, how well it must be done, and how to verify that it
meets the requirement They do not ask you to say why you have chosen the requirements. However. requirements are intended to quantify the trade between what we
would like to achieve and what is possible within the established budget Thus, we
should document as fully as possible the reasons for these trades and requirements so
we can effectively revisit them during mission utility assessments and regular requirement reviews.
One way to initially reduce cost and schedule is to minimize the upfront engineering on the program. "Shoot the engineers and get on with the program." can get
programs moving and contain growing engineering costs. This approach has some
good features. We do not want to spend excessive time optimizing a strawman design
that will change drastically at a later date. We also do not want to develop too much
detail in. the conceptual design. These activities divert resources from the more
important. to~level mission trades. At the same time. we must have enough upfront
system engineering as well as initial and continuing trades on objectives and mission

888

Applying the Space Mission Analysis and Design Process

23.2

utility. There is no substitute for these activities-ignorance does not improve system
performance.

23.2 Lessons Learned from Existing Space Programs
For the most part, the existing space mission analysis and design process works
well: trade-offs among technical alternatives in essentially all areas bring positive
results. But in our experience there are four common pitfalls in the front-end planning
of space missions:
• Disregarding or failing to understand the needs of opemtors, users, and developers during the early phase of design
• Failing to tmde on requirements
• Constmining trades to too Iowa level too early
• Postponing or avoiding assessment of alternatives
Inappropriate results such as higher cost or reduced performance usually result from
the acquisition process and organizational structure mther than from incorrect tradeoff decisions. Occasionally, parochial views and politics keep the players from
inremcting in a way that fosters good upfront design and development of the space
mission. Designing the mission opemtions concept. generating requirements, and
performing early tmdes without taking into account the needs of the users, opemtors
and developers can doom a progmm to failure from the beginning. A key to success is
to foster continuous and open communications between the players. This can be an uphill battle involving multiple organizations and possibly multiple nations, but it must
-be done.
The space mission concept and requirements drive any progmm, so users, opemtors
and developers of the system must work together to identify credible, cost-effective
mission approaches. Once requirements are defined, organizations often go to great
lengths and expense to meet them because they do not want to be unresponsive or to
say a given requirement is difficult This can unnecessarily drive up cost. Table 23-3
shows steps that can help solve this problem.
TABLE 23-3. Steps to Help Alleviate the Problem of Failing to Trade on Requirements.

1. Specify functional requirements only-not how they should be accompfisheQ

2. Identify and challenge difficult and costly requirements
3. Begin concept exploration with system requirements trades

4. Revisit top-level system requirement trades at each major milestone throughout the
program
5. Maintain open communications among all groups involved

We often constmin trades to low levels too early. Early in a progmm we commonly
do tmdes like altitude vs. resolution and covemge but ignore trades between system
elements (see Fig. 1-3). We should look for cost-effective tmde-offs among the
elements such as shifting capability from the launch vehicle to the spacecraft or from
the spacecmft to the ground segment. For example, we can move more computing and

23.3

Future Trends

data processing from the ground station to the spacecmft for autonomous navigation.
The question is, should we provide a spacecraft which can determine its position and
velocity on board and remove the interface to the ground? This could increase the cost
of spacecraft development but save a great deal in opemtions cost by reducing the
ground system's need to tmck the spacecraft. process data. and provide spacecraft
ephemeris. This is a politically sensitive trade because it takes money and responsibility away from the ground element and gives them to the space element This can
result in a turfbattle where decisions are made on the basis of who controls the budget.
mther than on what provides the best results at the lowest cost
Two positive steps can help reduce these problems:
• Look explicitly for tmdes between system elements
• Do these tmdes as early as possible, before organizational structure and politics rule out major options
Look at the result of these tmdes carefully. For example, when someone presents an
extremely low-cost spacecraft concept with minimal capability, look for higher costs
in other mission elements.
We often postpone or avoid assessing major alternatives for space progmms. We
do so to meet tight bridget constraints, to keep the progmm appearing stable, and to
avoid reducing the momentum to proceed. As we know, change costs much more as a
progmm proceeds. Change during concept explomtion may do little or nothing to
engineering cost, whereas changes during the definition phase involve more people
and a reassessment of a more detailed design. Design changes involve formal
paperwork and change controls. Changing anything once the hardware is in production
can dmmatically increase cost. It is more cost-effective to make changes as early as
possible.

23.3 Future Trends
In several respects, we expect more changes in the way that space progmms are
conducted over the coming decade than have occurred since the start of the space
program. * In the near tellIl. three distinct trends are apparent:
• Increased political and economic constraints driving the industry toward
lower-cost space missions and increased inter-organizational and international
coopemtion
• More reliance on advanced spacecraft processing
• The introduction of large constellations and, consequently, a more manufacturing approach to spacecmft design
Because of budget constraints on the space program as a whole, we expect a
continuing strong emphasis on lower costs for spacecraft and space missions. Small
spacecmft are a natural outcome, including single-pwpose small satellites for data
relay or materials processing and large constellations of small satellites for communi• The changing direction of future space programs has been discussed by a number of authors,
including Butler [1990], Fogg [1995], Handberg [1995], Harvey [1996], Heiken, et aI. [1991],
Hoban [1997], Johnson-Freese [1997], Kay [1995], Launius [1998], Richard Lewis [1990],
John Lewis [1997], Noorand Venneri [1997], Spudis [1996], Stine [1996], andZubrin [1996].

890

Applying the Space Mission Analysis and Design Process

23.3

cations, space surveillance, or tactical applications. Because of the accelerating use of
onboard processors and miniaturization of many components, smaIl, low-cost satellites will be as capable as older, larger satellites. (See, for example, Sarsfield [1998].)
More people are building and working with IightSats-smaIl, inexpensive spacecraft,
traditionally in low-Earth orbit but moving rapidly outward. As descnOed in Chap. 22,
the technologies used here tend to be nontraditional and far less expensive. LightSats
represent a new way of doing business in space that, if correctly exploited, can drive
down costs by a factor of 2 to 10 with respect to more traditional programs [Wertz and
Larson, 1996].
The biggest technical change in space missions will be the increased use of onboard
processing. Space computers are emerging from infancy, with full-fledged, generalpurpose processors now becoming available. We will use them much more as they
become more economical and begin to duplicate some of the ground processing capa":
. bility. As onboard processing increases, spacecraft will take on more complex tasks
and become more autonomous.
Increases in spacecraft autonomy could drive costs either up or down, depending
on the community's approach to autonomy and sOftware development. We strongly
recommend using software to help lower costs. As shown in Table 23-4, we believe
autonomy in moderation can reduce cost and risk by automating repetitive functions
on the spacecraft while leaving the higher-level functions to ground operations. Everyday tasks such as telemetry processing, attitude control, and orbit control should be
done autonomously on board, with all of the relevant information attached to the
payload data for downlink to the ground. On the other hand, tryingto fully automate
problem solving can be dramatically expensive. So long as the spacecraft is capable of
putting itself in a fail-safe mode, this work is best performed on the ground where
operators can do what they do best-use their intelligence to understand, resolve, and
repair spacecraft problems and respond to changing circumstances.
TABLE 23-4. Development of Low-Cost, Autonomous Systems. The objective of "autonomy
in rnoderatione is to automate repetitive tasks and spacecraft sating whOe allowing
people to identify and fix problems and create long-term plans [Wertz and Larson,
19961.
Functions That Should Be Automated
•
•
•
•

Attitude determination and control
Orbit determination and control
Payload data processing
Repetitive housekeeping, e.g., battery
charging, active thermal control
• Anomaly recognition
• Spacecraft sating

Functions That Should Not Be Automated
• Problem resolution
• Identification and implementation of fixes
• One-tima activities (e.g., deployment and
check-out)
• Long term operations planning
• Emergency handling beyond sating

We do not know if proposals to drive down launch costs will succeed in the coming
decade. If launch costs drop significantly, low-cost satellite systems will be possible.
Reducing launch costs will itself drive down spacecraft cost because it will no longer
be worth as much to optimize the spacecraft design or minimize weight [Wertz and
Larson, 1996]. Costs for space exploration would become more consistent with aviation and other commercial activities.
We also expect to see significant changes in space payloads, due both to the
increased level of processing and other factors. In observations and communications,

23.3

Future Trends

891

the use of increased processing capability and array sensors for observations will
greatly increase the capacity of small spacecraft. In addition, a number of new types
of space missions will begin, most notably materials processing in space and other
applications of a microgravity environment. This area is just now beginning and bas
enormous growth potential as low-gravity manufacturing processes become better
understood. Much of this will require low-cost access to space and the return of
payloads from space as well.
The commercial communications constellations have also had a major impact on
the process of designing and manufacturing spacecraft [Logsdon, 1995]. Commercial
geosynchronous spacecraft have been manufactured in an assembly line process for
some time. Nonetheless, low-Earth orbit constellations require that the entire constellation be built and launched in a short time in order to allow the system to begin
servicing customers. For example, the Iridium constellation of 66 satellites was
launched in slightly over a year which required satellites to be coming off the assembly
line at an average rate of approximately one per week. This significantly changes the
focus of spacecraft design from performance optimization to high-reliability manufacturing. The two contrasting approaches are presented in Chaps. 12 and 19 above. To
the extent that these manufacturing techniques can be applied to other space missions
as well, this should continue to reduce the cost, risk, and schedule of spacecraft development. The application of this to spacecraft components is discussed by Zafanella
[1998].
.
In addition, new constellations like Iridium, Celestri, Globalstar and even the eXiSting GPS, provide an unprecedented infrastructure that can be used to create new and
more cost-effective space mission architectures. For example having an abundance of
bandwidth available in space can facilitate the movement of data around the world,
thus alleviating the current problems we have with over-subscribed networks, and
. .
.
changing the way we do missions.
Since the first satellites, space has moved from a very novel actiVIty to a routine
commercial enterprise. Today, on the average, Americans use some form of space asset many times per day-weather, television, telephones, navigation, Internet, and
more. Companies are looking for ways to use space and space-related assets to ~velop
and provide highly marketable products and services. More than ever, compames are
focusing on the end-to-end perspective-providing customers what they need in a
more cost-effective way. For example, recent deregulation of electric utilities in North
America has resulted in regional utilities trying to sell their electricity all over the continent. One severe problem they face is how to keep track of the customers' use of electricity, which has prompted the need for a method of automatically reading utility
meters continentally-from space. The commercial space systems we propose must be
relevant and financially viable, while government space systems must be relevant and
cost-effective.
Today, space exploration depends more on policy, politics, and economics, than ~
technological limits. Virtually any mission is now technically possible. We can build
a lunar base send humans to Mars, develop space colonies and huge solar-powered
satellites, or'send manned or unmanned probes to the outer planets. Our limitations are
set by what we choose to do or what we can afford. As environmental problems
become more serious on the Earth's surface, intelligently using space will become
more important. Yet the use of space resources cannot grow unless we can de~­
strate that we are becoming more efficient and cost effective in our use of space. This
is the challenge for space in the early 21st century.

Applying the Space Mission Analysis and Design Process

23.3

References

Appendices

Butler, George V., ed. 1990. The 21st Century in Space. San Diego, CA: American
Astronautical Society.

Simon D. Dawson, Microcosm, Inc.

Fogg, Martyn J. 1995. Terrojorming: Engineering Planetary Environment. Warrendale, PA: Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc.
Handberg, Roger. 1995. The Future of the Space Industry: Private Enterprise and
Public Policy. New York: Quorum Books.

A. Mass Distribution for Selected Satellites .

894

Harvey, Brian. 1996. The New Russian Space Programme: From Competition to
Collaboration. New York: John Wiley & Sons.

B. Astronautical and Astrophysical Data

897

Heiken, Grant, David Vaniman, and Beven M. French. 1991. Lunar Sourcebook: A
User's Guide to the Moon. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.

C. Elliptical Orbit Equations

902

D. Spherical Geometry Formulas .

904

E. Universal Time and Julian Dates

913

Johnson-Freese, J. and Roger Handberg. 1997. Space, the Dormant Frontier:
Changing the Paradigm for the 21st Century. New York: Praeger Publishers.

F. Units and Conversion Factors

919

Kay, W D. 1995. Can Democracies Fly in Space? The Challenge of Revitalizing the
U.S. Space Program. New York: Praeger Publishers.

Fundamental Physical Constants

Inside Front Cover

Spaceflight Constants

Inside Front Cover

Hoban, Francis T.I997. Where do You Go After You've Been to the Moon? Malabar,
Fl.: Krieger Publishing Co.

Launius, Roger D. 1998. Frontiers of Space Exploration. Westport, CT: Greenwood
Publishing Group.
Lewis, John S. 1997. Mining the Sky: Untold Richesfrom the Asteroids, Comets, and
Planets. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Lewis, Richard S. 1990. Space in the 21st Century. New York: Columbia University
Press.
Logsdon, Tom. 1995. Mobile Communication Satellites: Theory and Application.
New York: McGraw Hill.
Noor, Ahmed K. and Samuel L. Venneri, eds. 1997. Future Aeronautical and Space
Systems. Reston, VA: AIAA.
Sarsfield, Liam. 1998. The Cosmos on a Shoestring: Small Spacecraft for Space and
Earth Sciences. Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corp.
Spudis, Paul D. 1996. The Once and Future Moon. Herndon, VA: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Stine, Harry G. 1996. Halfway to Anywhere: Achieving America's Destiny in Space.
M. Evans and Company, Inc.
Wertz, James R. and Wiley J. Larson, eds. 1996. Reducing Space Mission Cost.
Torrance, CA: Microcosm Press and Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Zafanella, Carlo. 1999. "Reducing Cost and Increasing Volume by a Factor of 10 in
the Space Component Business." Journal of Reducing Space Mission Cost, vol. 1
no. 2.

Index to Process Tables

Page Facing Inside Front Cover

Earth Satellite Parameters

Inside Rear Pages

The fundamental physical constants and conversions factors based on them are
those determined by the National Bureau of Standards using a least squares fit to the
best available experimental data [Cohen, 1986). Their intent is to create a set of
constants which are mutually consistent to within the experimental accuracy. Other
constants and conversion factors, such as the speed of light in vacuum or the conversion between feet and meters, are adopted as exact definitions of the units involved.
For astronomical and astronautical constants, such as the values of GM for various
objects in the solar system, values adopted by the International Astronomical Union
are used. Many of these are quoted from Astrophysical Quantities [Cox, 1999), which
kindly permitted use of proof copies for obtaining the most current data. We highly
recommend this volume for those who need additional quantitative detail about the
solar system or other astronomical topics.

References
Cohen, E. Richard and B.N. Taylor, 1986. CODATA Bulletin No. 63, Nov. New York:
Pergamon Press.
Cox, A.N. ed. 1999. Astrophysical Quantities. New York: Springer-Verlag.

Zubrin, Robert. 1996. Islands in the Sky: Bold New Ideas for Colonizing Space. New
York: John Wiley & Sons.
893

894

T

Appendix A

Appendix A

TABLE A-1.

Mass Distribution for Selected Satellites

Actual Mass for Selected SateDItes. The propeDant load depends on the
satellite design life.

Spacecraft Name
FLTSATCOM 1-5
FLTSATCOM6
FLTSATCOM 7-8
DSCSII
DSCSIII
NATO III
Intelsat IV
TDRSS
Average
Standard Deviation
GPSBlock1
GPS Block 2,1
GPS Block 2.2
Average

Standard Deviation
P80-1
DSP-15
DMSP5D-2
DMSP5D-3
Average
Standard Deviation

Loaded
Propellant
Dry Mass
Propellant
Mass (kg)
Mass (kg)
(kg)
Mass(%)
CommunicatIons Satellites
930.9
81.4
849.6
8.7%
980.0
109.1
870.9
11.1%
1150.9
109.0
1041.9
9.5%
530.0
54.1
475.9
10.2%
1095.9
228.6
867.3
20.9%
346.1
25.6
320.4
7.4%
669.2
136.4
532.8
20.4%
2150.9
585.3
1565.7
27.2%
981.7
166.2
815.6
16.9%
549.9
179.9
389.4
7.3"/0
NavIgation Satellites
508.6
29.5
479.1
5.8%
741.4
42.3
699.1
5.7%
918.6
60.6
858.0
6.6%
722.9
44.1
678.7
6.1%
205.6
15.6
190.3
0.5%
Remote Sensing Satellites
1740.9
36.6
1704.4
2.1%
2277.3
162.4
2114.9
7.1%
833.6
19.1
814.6
2.3%
1045.5
33.1
1012.3
3.2%
1474.3
62.8
1411.6
4.3%
660.9
66.8
604.5
2A%

,
Dry Mass
(%)
91.3%
88.9%
90.5%
89.8"k
79.1%
92.6%
79.6%
72.8%
83.1%
7.3%
94.2%
94.3%
93.4%
93.9%
0.5%
97.90/0
92.9%
97.7%
96.8"/0
95.7%
2.4%

895

Actual Mass for Selected Satellites. The propellant load depends on the
satellite design life.

Spacecraft Name

Table A-I lists representative satellite masses with and without propellant for
various types of spacecraft. Table A-2 fwther breaks down the dry mass by the
percentage devoted to each subsystem. See Table 18-2 for definitions of the mass categories and Table 10-2 for definitions of the various subsystems. Statistical data for
the various classes of missions are also provided. Table A-2 also includes subsystem
masses as a percentage of the payload mass, since this may be the only mass known
during early mission design.
The data here can be used as either a preliminary estimate or check on the reasonableness of more detailed methods (see Chaps. 10 and 11 for other methods). However, such historical data should always be used with caution and substantial margin
should be applied. The first three categories are more traditional, older DoD spacecraft. The LightSats are newer, typically much less expensive systems from many
developers, both US and international. As the satellite microminiaturization process
continues, individual components will get smaller and percentages will shift, depending on both the component mix and the mission needs-:TABLE A-1.

Mass Distribution for Selected Satellites

Loaded
Mass (kg)

erstfJd
Freja
SAMPEX

60.8
255.9
160.7
125.0
463.0
87.4
92.0
47.5
140.0
9.0
48.5
63.0
141.2
44.8

HErE
Clementine
Pluto Fast Flyby '93
RADCAL
ORBCOMM
AMSATA0-13
AMSATA0-16
PoSat
BremSat
Average
Standard Deviation

Dry Mass
Propellant
Propellant
Mass (kg)
(kg)
Mass(%)
UghtSats
no propulsion
60.8
nla
214.0
41.9
16.40/.0
no propulsion
160.7
nla
125.0
no" propulsion
nla
231.0
232.0
49.9%
80.5
7.9%
6.9
no propulsion
92.0
nla
33.1
14.4
30.3%
56.0
84.0
40.0%
no propulsion
9.0
nla
no propulsion
48.5
nla
no propulsIon
63.0
nla
70.0
109.3
49.6%
92.2
17.1%
31.3

Dry Mass
<%)
101),Q%
83.6%
101).0%
100.0%
50.1%
92.1%
100.0%
69.7%
60.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
77.4%
18.4%

Various algorithms and data are provided in Chaps. 10 and 11 to determine the
mass of individual subsystems. Actual mass distributions are provided in Table A-2
to develop initial estimates or perform reasonableness checks. Be careful using ~s
data. The percentages given do not necessarily represent the full spectrum of satellite
mass and subsystem mass distributions.
TABLE A-2.

Mass DlstrlbuUon for Selected Spacecraft.

Spacecraft Name
FL TSATCOM 1·5
FLTSATCOM6
FLTSATCOM 7-8
DSCSII

Percentage of Spacecraft Dry Mass '
Payload I Structure Thermal Power rr&C ADCS Propulsion
CommunicatIons Satellites
26.5%
26.4%

19.3%
18.7%

1.8%
2.0%

32.8%
23.0%

20.8%
23.5%
18.2%

2.1%
2.8%
5.6%
6.5%
5.1%
2.8%

DSCSIII
NATO III
Intelsat IV
TDRSS
Average
Standard Deviation

32.3%
22.1%
31.2%
24.6%

GPSBlock 1

20.5%
20.2%

GPS Block 2. 1
GPS Block 2,2

A""rage
Standard Deviation

27.4%
4.2%

38.5%
39.4%
32.8"/0

3.0%
3.0%

7.0%
6.8"/0
5.7%

3.9%
3.8%

21.3%
3.6% 31.9%
5.30/0
3.3%
1.9%
Navigation Satellites

4.8%
2.1%

6.9%
2.1%

3.3"k
3.0%
4.1%
2.4%
3.1%
6.9%
3.8%
1.4%

19.9%

5.8"k
5.2%
3.1%
4.7%
1.4%

6.20/0
5.4%
5.3%
5.6%
0.5%

3.6%
3.3"k
2.7%
3.2%
0.5%

19.3%
22.30/0
28.0%

23.0%
21.2%

25.1%
25.4%
23.5%

8.7%
9.9%
11.0%
9.9%

1.6%

3.1%

1.2%

29.3%
27.4%
34.7%
26.5%
26.4%

35.8%
31.0%
29.4%
32.1%
3.3%

2.5%
7.0% 11.5%
7.2% 4.4%
7.5% 6.3%
4.3% 7.4%
4.1% 6.2%

896
TABLE A-2.

897

Appendix A

AppendixB

Mass DIstribution for Selected Spacecraft.
Percentage of .Spacecraft Dry Mass

Spacecraft Name

PBO-1
DSP-15
DMSP5D-2
DMSP5D-3
Average
Standard Deviation
fJrsted
Freja
SAMPEX
HETE
Pluto Fast Ryby '93
RADCAL
ORBCOMM
PoSat
BremSat
Average
Standard Deviation
Average
Standard Deviation
Average%of
Payload Mass
Standard Deviation
of % of Payload
Mass

I Payload
41.1%
36.9%
29.9%
30.5%
34.6%
5.4%
21.5%
34.1%
32.5%
35.3%
8.7%
22.5%
25.3%
122%
27.8%
24.4%
9.3%
26.7%
7.5%
100.0%
0.0%

Structure Thermal Power
Remote Sensing SatelIltes
19.00/0
2.4% 19_9%
22.5%
0.5% 26.9%
15.6%
2.8% 21.5%
18.4%
2.9% 29.0%
18.9"10
2.1% 24.3%
2.8%
1.1%
4.3%
L/ghtSets
38.3%
0.8% 15.8%
22.7%
2.4% 19.0%
23.1%
2.5% 25.0%
16.0%
1.8% 20.3%
18.1%
4.6% 24.1%
31.0%
0.3% 18.6%
20.0%
2.5% 29.3%
13.9%
0.0% 36.1%
20.6%
0.0% 33.3%
1.7% 24.6%
22.7%
1.5%
7.0%
7.7%
All
21.7%
3.4% 27.9%
3.11%
6.6%
5.3%
81.10/0
12.7% 104.6%
40.8%

16.4%

62.3%

I TT&C
5.2"10
3.8%
2.5%
2.0%
3.4%
1.4%
16.7%
8.7%

Astronautical and Astrophysical Data

I

ADCS Propulsion
6.3%
5.5%
3.1%
2.9%
4.5%
1.7%
6.8%

6.0%
10.6"10 6.3%
8.5% 18.1%
23.9% 8.30/0
9.4% 18.2%
8.8% 8.8%
17.5% 21.1%
10.3"10 7.9%

6.1%
2.2%
7.4%
8.7%
6.1%
2.8%
none
7.0%
none
none
12.3%
none
5.3%

1~7%

11.3%

none
none
2.7%

5.4%

6.0%

4.50/0

7.5%

8.0%
5A% 4.7%
28.2% 29.9%

3.7%
3.2%
13.9%

35.5% 35.5%

30.2%

The average values and the associated standard deviation for each of the spacecraft
subsystems are also listed in Table A-2. The fmal row lists the percentage of the payload mass devoted, on the average, to the individual subsystems. This information is
useful in the beginning of a program when we only know the mass of the payload.
When using these estimates, be sure to apply an appropriate margin for error (See
Chap. 10).

See Inside Front Cover for Fundamental Pbysical Constants and Spaceflight Constants. See Inside Rear Cover for tabular Earth Satellite Data.
TABLE B-1.

Physical Properties of the Sun. (Data from Cox [1999]; SeldeImann [1992J.)

Radius of the Photosphere

6.95508 :to.00026 x 108m

Angular Diameter of the Photosphere at 1 AU

0.53313 deg

Mass.

1.9891 x 1030 kg
3
1.409 glcm

Mean Density
Total Radiation Emitted
Total Radiation per UnH Area at 1 AU

3.845 x.1028 Jls
2
1,367 Wm-

Apparent Visual MagnHude at 1 AU

-26.75

Absolute Visual MagnHude (MagnHude at Distance of 10 parsecs)

+4.82
+0.650

Color Index, B-V

G2V

Spectral Type

5,777K

Effective Temperature
Inclination of the Equator to the EcOptic

725deg

Adopted Period of Sidereal Rotation (L = 17 deg)

25.38deys

Period of Synodic Rotation Period

(,= latitude)

Mean Sunspot Period
Dates of Former Maxima
Mean Time from Maximum to Subsequent Minimum
TABLE 8-2.

26~90 + 52 sfn2 , days

11.04 years
1968.9, 1980.0, 1989.6
62 years

Physical Properties of the Earth. (Data from Cox [1999]; Seidelmann [1992J; lee
[1989J; McCarthy [1996].)

Equatorial Radius, a

6.37813649x 106 m

Flattening Factor (Ellipticity), tEl (a - e) la

1/298256 42 '" 0.003 352 819 70
6.3567517x106 m

Polar Radius,·

e

Mean Radius,· (tile) 113
Eccentricity,· (til-

cfl)112/a

SUriace Area
Volume
Ellipticity of the Equator (amax - amnJIamean
LongHude of the Maxima
Ratio of the Mass of the Sun to the Mass of the Earth

6.371 000 3 x 106 m
0.081 819 301
5.100657x1014 m2
1.083 207 x 1021 m3
-1.6x 10-5
14.805°W,165.105°E

332,945.9

Geocentric GravHationai Constant, GME ElIlE

3.986 004 418 x 1014 rri3s-2

Mass of the Earth

5.973 7 x

1024 kg

898

AppendixB

TABLE B-2.

Astronautical and Astrophysical Data

Physical ProperUes of the Earth. (Data from Cox [1999); Seldelmann [1992]; lee
[1989]; McCarthy [1996].)

Mean Density
Gravitational Reid Constants (Data from JGM-2; the
following constants should be used In conjunction with
these clata: Re = 6,378.136 3 km;
GMe = 398,600.441 5 kJn3/s2;
= 7.292115 855 3 x 10-5 rados-1)

roe

5,554.8 kg m-3

TABLE B-3.

Phase Law and VIsual Magnitude of the Moon.
P(~

~

f'

(deg)

J, 0

~ 0.108 262 692 563 881 5x 10-2

J3 -0.253 230 781 8191 n 4 x 10-5
J4 -o.162042999x10-5

899

V(R.~ -

V(R,O}

~

Before AfterFuD
Before After Fun
Full Moon Moon FuDMoon Moon

V(R,~ -

P(~

(deg)

V(R,O}

Before AfterFuD
Before AfterFuD
FuUMoon Moon FuDMoon Moon

0

1.000

1.000

0.000

0.000

80

0.120

0.111

2.301

2.388

10

0.787

0.759

0.259

0.299

90

0.0824

0.0780

2.709

2.769

20

0.603

0.586

0.549

0.580

100

0.0580

0.0581

3.129

3.089

4,671 km

30

0.466

0.453

0.828

0.859

.110

0.03n

0.0405

3.558

3.481

Average Lengthening of the Day

40

0.356

0.350

1.121

1.139

120

0.0249

0.0261

4.009

3.958

0.0015 sec/century

0.275

0.273

1.401

1.409

130

0.0151

0.0158

4.552

4.503

Annual General Precession in Longitude
(I.e., Precession of the Equinoxes), at J.2000
(T In centuries from J.2ooo)

50

50.290 966" + 0.022 222 6" T
-0.0042"1'2

60

0.211

0.211

1.689

1.689

140

0.0093

-

5.078

70

0.161

0.156

1.982

2.016

150

-

ObHquity of the Ecliptic, at Epoch 2000

23° 26' 21.4119"

Rate of Change of the Obliquity (T In Julian
Centuries, T = (JD-2,451,545.0)/36,525»

46.8150"T
-0.000 59" T2
+ 0.001 813" T3

Mean Distance of Earth Center from Earth-Moon
Barycenter

Amplitude of the Earth's Nutation
Sidereal Period of Rotation, Epoch 2000

2.556 25 x 10-3 deg
0.997 269 68 de

Length of Tropical Year (ref. = 1'), (T In Julian
Centuries, T = (JD-2,451 ,545.0)136,525»
T =(JD-2,451,545.0)l36,525

365.242 189 669 8 +
0.OOO00615359T -7.29 x Hr'O T2
+ 2.64 x Hr1O T3de

Length of Anomallstlc Year (Perihelion to Perihelion)
Epoch 1999.0
'

365.259 635 4 de
= 31,558,432.5 s
= 7.2921150 x 10-5 rad s-1
= 15.041 06717866910 arcsec.s-1

Mean Orbital Speed

= 2.978 48 x 104 m.s-1

Mean Distance From Sun

= 1.000 001 057 AU

.

= 1.495 980 29 x 10" m

-

5.842

Geocentric and Geodetic Coordinates on the Earth

=88164.1oo4s
= 23h56m 04.098 9

Mean Angular Velocity

0.0046

As shown in Fig. B-1, geocentric coordilUltes are defined with respect to the center
of the Earth. However,latitude and longitude are frequently given in geodetic coordinates which are defined with respect to an oblate reference ellipsoid (i.e.• a figure
created by rotating an ellipse about its minor axis). with the height, h, measured perpendicular to a plane tangent to the ellipsoid. A triaxial ellipsoid is not generally used
since the gain in representation is small. Although not normally used for space mission
work, astronomical latitude and longitude are defined relative to the local vertical, or
the normal to the equipotential surface of the Earth. Thus, astronomical latitude is
defined as the angle betWeen the local vertical and the Earth's equatorial plane. Maximum values of the deviation ofthe vertical, or the angle between the local vertical and
the normal to a reference ellipsoid, are about 1 minute of arc. Maximum variations in
the height between the ellipsoid and mean sea level (also called the equipotential
surface) are about 100 m. Seidelmann [1992] provides an extended discussion of
coordinate systems and transformations.
Axis of Rotation

Based on adopted values of f and a.

Polar c
Radius

Phase Law and Visual Magnitude of the Moon

Tangent to

Ellipse at p'

To determine the Moon's visual magnitude, V(R,~, at any distance and phase let
R be the observer-Moon distance in AU and ~ be the phase angle at the moon betw'een
the Sun and observer. Then
(B-1)

tru:

where
phase la,,:, P@, for the Moon is given in Table B-3 [Hapke, 1974]. Note
that the VIsual magrutude of the Moon at opposition (i.e., full Moon) at the mean distance of the Moon from the Earth is -12.73.
Fig. B-1. Geocentric vs. Geodetic Coordinates.

900

AppendixB

Astronautical and Astrophysical Data

The geocentric latitude, ~~ of a point, p, on the surface of the Earth is the angle at
the Earth's center between p and the equatorial plane. The geodetic or geographic latitude, fI, is the angle between the normal to the reference ellipsoid (at point p') and the
equatorial plane. The ellipsoid is typically defined by the flattening./. or the inverse.
flattening, 1/f, given by

a-b

f = - - '" 1/298.256 42 for the Earth
a

(B-2)

where a and b are the semimajor and semiminor axes of the ellipsoid.
The geocentric longitude, A, is defined by the angle between the reference (or zero)
meridian and the meridian of point p (and p'). measured eastward around the Earth
from 0° to 360°. The geodetic longitude will be identical to the geocentric longitude
assuming that the reference ellipsoid has the same axes and reference meridian as the
geocentric system.
. The ellipsoidal height, h, of point p is measured along the normal to the ellipse, and
With respect to the point of intersection of that normal with the ellipsoidal surface, that
is, from pointp'. Other 'heights' are possible-for example, the geocentric radius, r,
and the height above mean sea level or geoidal height, H.
We often express the position of a point, p, on or near the Earth in a right-handed
geocentric cartesian coordinate system (X, Y, Z). Here the direction of the Z-axis is
that of the rotational reference ellipsoid, the X-axis is perpendicular to Z through the
reference meridian. The Y-axis completes the triplet in a right-handed sense.
Conversion from geocentric to geocentric c~ian coordinates is given by

[~l
Z

:~:~l

p

(B-3)

Note that f/I = sin-I (ZI r) may also be used to determine f/I, and that these functions

are evaluated sUch that-90° ~4 S+90°, and 0° SAS36O°.
To convert from geocentric cartesian to geodetic coordinates is not as simple a pro-

cedure. An exact solution has been given by Borkowski [1989) based on using an
expression for the reduced latitude in a solvable fourth-degree polynomial.
We first calculate intermediate variables as follcws:

R=~X2 +y2

=

l

Z

p

((I-e

2

)VaR

D=(p3 +~)1/2

F=[bZ+(a 2 -b 2 )VaR

v ={D_Q}1f3 _{D+Q)1f3

P=4(EF+l)/3

G=~[~E2 +v +E]

t=[G 2 +(F-vG)/(2G-E)f -G
Finally, the latitude and ellipsoidal height are computed from:

tP =tan-1(a(l- t 2)1 (2bt»)
h =(R - at) cos tP + (Z - b)sintP
(B-8)
To obtain the correct sign, set the sign of b to that of Z before beginning. This
solution is singular for points at the Z-axis (r = 0) or in the XY-plane. For which:

tP =~' = 90°}ZaxJS
.
h=Z-b

Conversion from geodetic to geocentric cartesian coordinates is given by

[~l \~ :4:::~]
)N;

Q=2(E2_F2)

E~[bZ-(a2 -b 2

= {:::::
sinl/J'

(B-4)

~=~'=O}XYplane

h=R-a

e= ~a2

(B-ll)
(B-5)

and NIP is the ellipsoidal radius of curvature in the meridian, given by

N~ =a/~I-e2sin2~

(B-6)

p

tan-I(y IX)

Cox, A.N. ed. 1999. Astrophysical Quantities, 1999. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Hapke B. 1974. "Optical Properties of the Lunar Surface."

tan- I( Z/~X2 + y2)
=

References
Borkowski. K. M. 1989. "Accurate Algorithms to Transform Geocentric to Geodetic
Coordinates," Bulletin Geodesique 63. no.l, p. 50-56.

Conversion from geocentric cartesian to geocentric coordinates is given by

[n

(B-I0)

Finally,

where e is the eccentricity of the ellipsoid

_b2 /a = ~2f - f2

(B-9)

Additionally, for points close to these conditions, some round-off error may be
avoided and the accuracy improved slightly be replacing the value of v with
v = v3 + 2Q/3P (near Z axis or XY plane)

+h)sin~

901

McCarthy. Dennis D .• USNO. 1996. "!ERS Technical Note 21." IERS Conventions.

(B-7)

Seidelmann, P. Kenneth. USNO, ed. 1992. The Explanatory Supplement to the
Astronomical Almanac. Mill Valley, CA: University Science Books.

Zee, Chong-Hung. 1989. Theory of Geostationary Satellites. Netherlands: Kluwer.

Elliptical Orbit Equations

Argument ofperigee:
C/)

=

AppeodixC

~adius of apogee: Ta

Elliptical Orbit Equations

Ta =a(l+e)
Ta =2a-Tp

cos-{{(~»]

if (ez < 0) then C/) = 21£' See Table 6-2
Eccentric an011lllly: E

tan(~)=&tan(~)
~1_e2 sinv

sinE=-'~-­

cosE

l+ecosv
e+cosv
l+ecosv

See Table 6-3

C/) .

See Table 6-2
Mean anomoly: M

M=n(t-to}+Mo
M

=(~)112 o(t-to)+ Mo

M=E-esinE
See Table 6-3

Mean motion: n
n = ~IJ/a3

Nodol vectoT: n

n=zxh

e=(r,,+Tp)

See Eq. (6-8)

Tp
e=l-a

Ii -Ij
e=-----Ij cos VI - Ii cos v2
See Eq. (6-3)
EccentriciJy vectoT: e

e= ~

I

{(V -;}-(r.V)v}

Period: P
P=21£'/n P=21£'~a3/IJ
See Table 6-2

See Table 6-2

a(l- e2 )
T = 1+ ecosV
Tp(l+e)
T= l+ecosv
See Eq. (6-3)
Right ascension ofthe node: Q

(I-e)

See Eq. (6-9)
Flight path angle: y

1:.
p

esinv
l+ecosv

= cos

_I[ion]
lillnl

if(n y <0) then Q=21£'-Q
where n is the nodal vector not the
mean motion
See Table 6-2

SemimajoT axis: a
a=

=2a- 1:a
Ij(I+ecosv1)

Tp =
l+e
See Table 6-2

Time since perillpsis: t
(E-esinE)
t=-'---n
See Table 6-3
True anomoly: v

v=cos-{«;:n
if (r-V)<O then v=21£'-v

cos v =

Radius: T

(Ta+Tp)_-IJ
2 .- 2e

cos v =

Tp{l+e)

I

Te

e

a(l-e

2

)

Ta
a= (1+ e)

tan(~) =~ tan ( ~)
See Table 6-2

Velocity: V

V=~2IJ _ IJ
T

a

TpVp = TaY,.
See Eq. (6-4)
Circulllr velocity: Vcirc

Vdrc =~IJIT

Escape velociJy: Vesc

See Table 6-2
Specific angulllr momentum: h

h=rxV

h = TaVa
See Eq. (6-7)

= TpVp

I

Te
e
cosE-e
cosv=----=
l-ecosE

See Eq. (6-5)

Tp=a{I-e)

2

See Table 6-5

(l+ecosvl )
(I-e)

Radius ofperigee: Tp

'P=Ta{I+e)

tany

Ta=1j

Q

(r" - 'P)

a

.= cos_I[zoh]
iii !hi

Ta=Tp(l_e)

See Table 6-3

EccentriciJy: e

r"
e=--l

(I+e)

Inclination: i

C/)

903

Vesc = ~2IJIT
See Eq. (6-6)

905

Spherical Geometry

AppendixD
Spherical Geometry
Table D-l. Right
Spherical Triangles

.D.I General Formulas
This appendix provides a summary of basic rules. More detailed discussions are
provided by Green [1985), Smart [1977), and Newcomb [1960). Wertz [2001) provides a detailed discussion of global geometry and its application to problems of space
mission analysis, including a discussion of "full-sky" techniques that eliminate the
quadrant ambiguities which make automated spherical geometry solutions complex
and inconvenient
A right spherical triangle is one with at least one right angle. (Unlike plane triangles, spherical triangles can have 1, 2, or 3 right angles.) Any two of the remaining
components, including the two remaining angles, serve to completely define the triangle. Napier's Rules, given in any of the above books, provide a concise formulation
for all possible right spherical triangles. However, experience has shown that it is
substantially more convenient to write out explicitly the rules for the relatively small
number of possible combinations of known and unknown sides and angles. These are
listed in Table D-1.
A quadrantal spherical triangle is one with at least one side which is 90 deg in
length. As with right spherical triangles, any two of the remaining five components
completely define the triangle. These are given by a corresponding set of Napier's
Rules. Again, it is more practical to write out explicitly all possible relationships.
These are given in Table D-2.
An oblique spherical triangle has arbitrary sides and angles. Sides and angles are
generally defined over the range of 0 to 180 deg, although most of the spherical geometry relations continue to hold in the angular range up to 360 deg. A set of basic rules
which can be applied to any spherical triangle are given in Table D-3. Finally, these
general rules can be used to write explicit expressions for any of the unknown components in any oblique spherical triangle with any three components known. These are
given in full by Wertz [2001).

The line below each formula indicates the
quadrant of the answer. Q(A) = Q(a) means
that the quadrant of angle A is the same as
that of side a. "2 possible solutions" means
that either quadrant provides a correct solution to the defined triangle.

Given

Find

a,h

cosh =cosa cosh
Q(h) = {Q(a) Q(b)}*

a,h

sinA = sin a/sin h
cosb =cosh/cosa
Q(b) = {Q(a)/Q(h)}** Q(A) = Q(a)

b, h

sinB=sinb/sinh
cosA = tan b/tanh
cos a = cosh/cosh
Q(a) = {Q(b)/Q(h)}** Q(A) = {Q(b) IQ(h)}** Q(B) = Q(b)

a,A

sin b = tana/tanA
2 possible solutions

sinh =sina/sinA

sinB= cosAlcosa

2 possible solutions

2 possible solutions

tanb=sinatanB

tanh=tana/cosB
Q(h) = {Q(a) Q(B)}*

Q(A) = Q(a)

Q(a) = Q(A)

tanh=tanb/cosA
Q(h) = {Q(b) Q(A)}*

Q(B) = Q(b)

sin a =tanb/tanB

sinh =sinb/sinB

sin A =cosB/cosb

2 possible solutions

2 possible solutions

2 possible solutions

a,B

Q(b) = Q(B)

b,A

References
Green, Robin M. 1985. Spherical Astronomy. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

b,B

tan a =sinb tan A

tanA =tana/sinh
Q(A) = Q(a)

tanB=tanh/sina
Q(B) = Q(b)
cosB = tan a/tan h
Q(B) = {Q(a)/Q(h)}**

cos A = cos a sinB
cosB =cosb sin A

Newoomb,Simon. 1960. A Compendium ofSpherical Astronomy. New York: Dover.

h,A

tanB= 1/cosh tanA
tanb =tanh cos A
Q(b) = {Q(A)/Q(h)}** Q(B)={Q(A)/Q(h)}**

Smart, W.M. 1977. Textbook on Spherical Astronomy, 6th ed. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

sin a =sinh sin A
Q(a) = Q(A)

h,B

sinb = sinh sinB
Q(b) = Q(B)

Q(a) = {Q(B)/Q(h)}** Q(A)={ Q(B) IQ(h)}**

Wertz, James R. 2001. Mission Geometry; Orbit and Constellation Design and Management. El Segundo, CA, and Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Microcosm Press and
Kluwer Academic Publishers.

A,B

tan a =tanh cosB

tanA = 1/cosh tanB

cosa=cosA/sinB

cosb = cosBlsinA

cosh = 1/tanA tanB

Q(a)

Q(b) = Q(B)

Q(h)

= Q(A)

= {Q(A)Q(B)}*

*

* {Q(x) Q(y)} == 1st quadrant if Q(x) =Q(y), 2nd quadrant if Q(x) Q(y)
{Q(x)/Q(h)} == quadrant ofx ifh S90deg,quadrantoppositex ifh >90deg.

**

906

AppenttixD

Spherical Geometry

Table D-2. Quadrantal
Spherical Triangles

907

Table D-3. Oblique
. Spherical Triangles

The line below each formula indicates the quadrant of
the answer. Q(A) = Q(a) means that the quadrant of
angle A is the same as that of side a. ''2 possible
solutions" means that either quadrant provides a
correct solution to the defined triangle.

The following rules hold for any
spherical triangle:

sin a sinb. sine
The Law of Sines: ~A = ~B =~C
SID

SID

SID

The Law of Cosines for Sides:
Given

Find

A,B

cOsH=-cosA cosB
Q(H) = {Q(A) Q(B)} *

A,H

cosB=-cosHlcosA sina=sinAlsinH
Q(B) = {Q(A) \ Q(H)} ** Q(a) = Q(A)

tan a = tanAlsinB
Q(a) = Q(A)

tanb=tanBlsinA
Q(b) = Q(B)
cosb=-tanAltanH
Q(b)={ Q(A)\Q(H) }**

B,H

cos A =-cosH lcosB cos a-= - tan B I tan H
sinb=sinBlsinH
Q(A) = {Q(B)\Q(H)}** Q(a) = {Q(B)\Q(H)}** Q(b) = Q(B)

A,a

sinB=tanAltana

sinH=sinAlsina

2 possible solutions

sinb=cosalcosA

2 possible solutions

2 possible solutions

A,b

tanB=sinA tanb
Q(B) = Q(b)

tanH=-tanAlcosb
Q(H) = (Q(A) Q(b)} *

cosa=cosAsinb
Q(a) = Q(A)

B,a

tanA =sinBtana
Q(A) = Q(a)

tanH=-tanBlcosa
Q(H) = (Q(B) Q(a)}*

cosb =cosB sin a

sinA =tanBltanb
2 possible solutions

sinH=sinBlsinb
2.possible solutions

H,a

sinA = sin Hsin a
Q(A) = Q(a)

tanB=-tanHcosa
tanb=-1/cosHtana
Q(B) = (Q(a) \ Q(H)}** Q(b)={Q(a) \Q(H)}**

H,b

sinB=sinHsinb
Q(B) = Q(b)

tanA=-tanHcosb
tan a =-1/cosHtanb
Q(A) = {Q(b)\Q(H)}** Q(a)={Q(b)\Q(H)}**

a,b

cosA =cosalsinb
Q(A) = Q(a)

cosB =cosblsina
Q(B) = Q(b)

B,b

-

cos a=cos bcos e+ sin b sin e cos A
cos b= cos e cos a + sin c sin a cos B
cos c= cos a cos b+ sin a sin b cos C
The Law of Cosines for Angles:
cos A =-cos B cos C + sinB sin Ccos a
cos B = -casC cos A + sin C sin A cos b
cos C=-cosA cos B + sin A sin B cos e
Gauss's Formula:

Q(b)

= Q(B)

sin[.l(A-B)] =
2

sin[t(a-b)]

.

sIDcj2

cosCj2

Useful Derived Formulas:

c = tan-1 (tan b cos A) ± taJrl(tan a cos B)

sin a =cosb/cosB
2 possible solutions

cosH =-l/tana tanb
Q(H) = (Q(a)Q(b)}*

*(Q(x) Q(y)} == 1st quadrant ifQ(x) = Q(Y), 2nd quadrant ifQ(x) ~ Q(y)
**(Q(x)\Q(H)} == quadrant ofx ifH > 9Odeg, quadrant opposite x ifH~90deg.

C-l(
1
)+tan-1(
1
)
-tan
tanAcosb tan Bcosa

D.2 Thermal Geometry*
As discussed in Sec. 11.5, thermal calculations are made more complex by both the
IR and albedo radiation from the Earth or other nearby planet. ~ecause the ~Ianet fills
a large area of the sky from low orb~t, th~ calculation of geometrical factors IS complex
and not amenable to simple approximations. Consequently, the thermal IR and albedo

• New section added to the 5th printing, Sep.t. 2003.

908

AppendixD

Spherieal Geometry

inputs are both adjusted by thermal geonietry factors, FIR and Falbedo> which are listed
fo~ a common range of spacecraft altitudes and attitudes in the tables below. Computation of the values needed for the table look-up are described here and the application
of the geometry factors is described in Sec. 11.5.
The tables are applicable to a flat plate, with normal vector, N, in the vicinity of a
planetary body. The whole spacecraft Can then be approximated as a series of flat
plates, ",:ith the geometry for ea~h surface. computed independently. (See Examples 1,
2, and 3 m
5.1 for computation of echpses, Sun angle geometry, and orbit average
solar thermal mput on a flat plate.) The thermal IR radiation from the Earth is modeled
only as it function of 1'/, the nadir angle between N and the center of the Earth and H
the al~tude of t!te spacecraft above the surface of the Earth. The albedo geometrY
factor IS a ~Ction of 1'/, H,.Q, and O. As shown in Fig. D-l,.Q is the rotation angle
about the nadir vector from the Sun to N. (Because it is a rotation angle, it is the same
angle whether measured on the spacecraft or on the Earth's surface.) 0 is the Earth
central angle from the Sun to the spacecraft which, to the accuracy of the thermal
computations, is equal to 180 deg minus the angle at the spacecraft from the Sun to
nadir.

&<:.

For planets other than the Earth, the same geometry factors can be used with the
planetary albedo and thermal IR characteristics from Table 11-46. The altitudes listed
in Table D-l should be interpreted as the altitudes proportional to the planetary radius.
Thus, in Table D-l, the data for 500 km altitude corresponds to 0.0784 R E, where RE
is the Earth's equatorial radius of 6,378.14 km. For Mars with an equatorial radius of
3,397 km, the data for 500 km in Table D-l corresponds to an altitude above Mars of
3397 x 0.0784 = 266 km.
TABLE 0-4.

Geometric Factor for Earth IR on a Flat Plate
Altitude (km)

200
(0.0314 Re)

30
60

90
120
150
500
(0.0784 Re)

Orbit

"

0

0

30
60

90
120
150
1000
(0.158 Re)

0

30
60

90
120
150
1500
(0.235 Re)

Rg. 0-1.

Computation of Inputs to be Used In Determining the Thermal GeOmetry Factors.
See text for discussion.

120
150
2000
(0.314 Re)

For an Earth-oriented spacecraft, the nadir angle, 1'/, is known or can be computed by
any of the methods in Sees. 5.1 and 5.2. The Earth central angle from the Sun to the
spacecraft, 0, is given by:
cos (180 deg - (J) = - cos 0 = cos AzslUI cos Ps

(0-1)

where,,~ZS/Ul is the azimuth of the Sun relative to nadir and f3s, often called the "~
angle, IS the angle of the Sun out of the orbit plane. The rotation angle .0 is then given
by:
n
cosf3N +cosOcos1'/
cos .... = -...:....:..::--::-:-----=sinOsin 1'/

where f3N is the angle from the Sun to the normal,
Sec. 5.1.)

(0-2)

N, to the plate in question. (See

0

30
60
90

0

30
60

90
120
150
GEO

0

(5.611 Re)

30
60

90

F,R
0.9401
0.8284
0.6026
0.3476
0.1324
0.0140
0.8618
0.7512
0.5186
0.2746
0.0875
0.0045
0.7527
0.6522
0.4216
0.1980
0.0467
0.0006
0.6613
0.5727
0.3572
0.1528
0.0274
0.0000
0.5883
0.5099
0.3109
0.1228
0.0166
0.0000
0.0239
0.0208
0.0120
0.0008

910

AppendixD

Spherical Geometry

TABLE D-5. Geometric Factor for Earth Albedo on a Flat Plate for 'II = O.
Altitude
FaJbedo
(km)
8
Q=O-360
200
0
0.9486
(0.0314Re)
30
0.8215
60
0.4743
90
0.0118
500
0
0.8587
(0.0784Re)
30
0.7437
60
0.4293
90
0.0232
1000
0
0.7381
(0.158 Re)
30
0.6392
60
0.3688
90
0.0344
1500
0
0.6423
(0.235 Re)
30
0.5563
60
0.3203
90
0.0400
2000
0
0.5662
(0.314 RE)
30
0.4904
60
0.2818
90
0.0426
GEO
0
0.0175
(5.611 Re)
30
0.0151
60
0.0099
90
0.0046

TABLE 0-7. Geometric Factor for Earth Albedo on a Flat Plate for TJ = 60.

200
(0.0314 Re)

9

0
30
60
90
500
0
(O.0784Re) 30
60
90
1000
0
(0.158 Re)
30
60
90
1500
0
(O.235RE)
30
60
90
2000
0
(0.314 Re)
30
60
90
GEO
0
(5.611 Re)
30
60
90

Q=O
0.8202
0.7178
0.4230
0.0185
0.7390
0.6520
0.3902
0.0325
0.6382
0.5671
0.3438
0.0444
0.5563
0.4961
0.3020
0.0490
0.4904
0.4384
0.2672
0.0506
0.0152

0.0132
0.0088
0.0041

Q=3O
0.8202
0.7168
0.4213
0.0182
0.7390
0.6504
0.3875
0.0479
0.6382
0.5652
0.3405
0.0464
0.5563
0.4942

0.2987
0.0471
0.4904
0.4365
02642
0.0487
0.0152
0.0132
0.0088
0.0041

FaJbedo
0=60
0=90
0.8202
0.8202
0.7141
0.7103
0.4166
0.4101
0.0143
0.0095
0.7390
0.7390
0.6460
0.6400
0.3798 0.3694
0.0263
0.0198
0.6382
0.6382
0.5599 0.5526
0.3313
0.3189
0.0397
0.0298
0.5563
0.5563
0.4889
0.4817
02897
02274
0.0418
0.0346
0.4904 0.4904
0.4315
0.4247
02557
02440
0.0437
p.0369
0.0152
0.0152
0.0132
0.0131
0.0087 ' 0.0085
0.0040
0.0039

Q=120
0.8202
0.7066
0.4036
0.0067
0.7390
0.6340
0.3591
0.0140
0.6382
0.5454
0.3063
0.0226
0.5563
0.4745
02651
0.0274
0.4904
0.4178
02325
0.0300
0.0152
0.0130
0.0083
0.0038

All(km)

9

200
(O.0314Re)

0
30
60
90
0
30
60
90
0
30
60
90
0
30
60
90
0
30
60
90
0
30
60
90

500
(0.0784 Re)

1000
(0.158 Re)

1500
(0.235 Re)

2000
(0.314 Re)

GEO
(5.611 Re)

TABLE D-6. Geometric Factor for Earth Albedo to a Flat Plate, TJ =30.
All (km)

911

Q=O
0.5959
0,5261
0.3151

0.0202
0.5068
0.4550
0.2813
0.0331
0.4092
0.3746
0.2417

0.0424
0.3431

0.3181
02098
0.0449
02947

0.2758
0.1842
0.0449
0.0088
0.0079
0.0053
0.0026

0=30
0.5959
0.5427
0.3128
0.0183
0.5068
0.4529
0.2776
0.0303
0.4092
0.3719
0.2354
0.0390
0.3431
0.3153
02037
0.0415
0.2947
02731
0.1789
0.0417
0.0088
0.0078
0.0053
0.0026

FBlbedo
Q=90
0.5959
0.5959
Q=60

0=120

Q=150 Q =180
0.5959

0.5959

0.5211

0.5161

0.3065
0.0139
0.5068
0.4470
0.2674
0.0234
0.4092
0.3644
0.2220
0.0310
0.3431
0.3076
0.1901
0.0336
02947
0.2655
0.1661
0.0341
0.0088
0.0077
0.0051
0.0024

0.2980
0.0081
0.5068
0.4389
02534
0.0138
0.4092
0.3544
0.2045
0.0188
0.3431
0.2972
0.1712
0.0211
0.2947
02552
0.1468
0.0220
0.0088
0.0075
0.0049
0.0022

0.5959
0.5112
0.2894

0.5075
0.2831
0.0013
0.5068
0.4250
0.2293
0.0024
0.4092
0.3369
0.1742
0.0039
0.3431
0.2789
0.1399
0.0054
0.2947
02373
0.1163
0.0066
0.0088
0.0072
0.0044
0.0019

0.5062
0.2808
0.0003
0.5068
0.4229
02255
0.0009
0.4092
0.3342
0.1696
0.0018
0.3431
0.2761
0.1351
0.0026
0.2947
0.2345
0.1137
0.0033
0.0088
0.0072
0.0044
0.0019

0.0053
0.5068
0.4309
02395
0.0071
0.4092
0.3443
0.1519
0.0113
0.3431

02866
0.1323
0.0123
02947
0.2448
0.1292
0.0123
0.0088
0.0073
0.0047
0.0021

TABLE D-6. Geometric Factor for Earth Albedo on a Flat Plate for TJ = 90.
0=150
0.8202
0.7039
0.3989
0.0042
0.7390
0.6296
0.3515
0.0097
0.6382
0.5402
0.2972
0.0173
0.5563
0.4693
02560
0.0221
0.4904
0.4128
02240
0.0250
0.0152
0.0129
0.0083
0.0038

Q =180
0.8202
0.7029
0.3972
0.0032
0.7390
0.6280
0.3487
0.0081
0.6382
0.5382
0.2939
0.0153
0.5563

0.4674
02527
0.0202
0.4904
0.4111
02210
0.0233
0.0152
0.0129
0.0082
0.0037

All(km)

200
(O.0314Re)

500
(0.0784 Re)

1000
(0.158 Re)

1500
(0235 Re)

2000
(0.314 Re)

GEO
(5.611Re)

9
0
30
60
90
0
30
60
90
0
30
60
90
0
30
60
90
0
30
60
90
0
30
60
90

0=0
0.3511
0.3124
0.1899
0.0165
0.2689
0.2453
0.560
0.0249
0.1924

0.1811
0.1263
0.0290
0.1470
0.1416
0.1026
0.0287
0.1162
0.1143
0.0840
0.0272
0.0004
0.0008
0.0006
0.0003

Q=30
0.3511
0.3112
0.1880
0.0146
02689
02438
0.1531
0.0219
0.1924
0.1791
0.1194
0.0256
0.1470
0.1397
0.0963
0.0253
0.1162
0.1125
0.0793
0.0240
0.0004
0.0006
0.0004
0.0003

FaJbedo
Q=90
0.3511
0.3040
0.1755
0.0052
0.2689
02328
0.1344
0.0079
0.1924
0.1665
0.0960
0.0092
0.1470
0.1272
0.0731
0.0091
0.1162
0.1008
0.0575
0.0086
0.0004
0.0003
0.0002
0.0001

Q=60
0.3511
0.3081
0.1827
0.0101
0.2689
0.2391
0.1452
0.0152
0.1924
0.1738
0.1383
0.0161
0.1470
0.1345
0.1032
0.0165
0.1162
0.1075
0.0695
0.0165
0.0004
0.0004
0.0003
0.0002

0=120
0.3511
02998
0.1684

0.0017
0.2689
0.2268
0.1238
0.0026
0.1924
0.1693
0.0835
0.0031
0.1470
0.1200
0.0608
0.0031
0.1162
0.0938
0.0460
0.0029
0.0004
0.0003
0.0000
0.0000

=

Q=150 Q 180
0.3511
0.3511
0.2969 0.2957
0.1630
0.1611
0.0002 0.0000
0.2689
0.2689
0.2203
0.2220
0.1157
0.1128
0.0003 .0.0000
0.1924
0.1924
0.1540
0.1520
0.0743
0.0709
0.0004
0.0000
0.1470
0.1470
0.1148
0.1129
0.0518 0.0485
0.0004 0.0000
0.1162
0.1162
0.0888 0.0870
0.0376
0.0345
0.0004 0.0000
0.0004 0.0004
0.0002
0.0002
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

912

913

AppendixD

.

TABLE 0-9. Geometric Factor for Earth Albedo on a Flat Plate for 11 = 120
Alt(km)

e

200
(0.0314 RE>

0
30
60
90
0
30
60
90
0
30
60
90
0
30
60
90
0
30
60
90
0
30
60
90

500
(0.0784 RE>

1000
(0.158 RE>

1500
(0.235 RE>

2000

(0.314 RE>

GEO
(5.611 RE>

AppendixE
Universal Time and Julian Dates

FaJbedO

Q=O
0.1328
0.1193
0.0741
0.0089
0.0836
0.0079
0.0513
0.Q109
0.0444
0.0434
0.0307
0.0098
0.0258
0.0261
0.Q195
0.0076
0.0151
0.0159
0.0125
0.0057
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

Q=30
0.1326
0.1187
0.0730
0.0073
0.0836

0.on1

0.0500
0.0094
0.0444
0.0428
0.0296
0.0084
0.0258
0.0257
0.0186
0.0065
0.0151
0.0156
0.0118
0.0048
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

Q=60
0.1328
0.1171
0.0701
0.0060
0.0836
0.0752
0.0465
0.0055
0.0444
0.0409
0.0284
0.0051
0.0258
0.0242
0.0161
0.0040
0.0151
0.0145
0.0100
0.0030
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

Q=90 Q=12O
0.1326
0.1326
0.1149
0.1126
0.0663
0.0624
0.0030
0.0015
0.0836
0.0836
0.0724
0.0697
0.0418
0.0371
0.0030· 0.0009
0.0444
0.0444
0.0385
0.0360
0.0222
0.0179
0.0022
0.0004
0.0258
0.0258
0.0223
0.0204
0.0128
0.0095
0.0015
0.0002
0.0151
0.0151
0.0131
0.0116
0.0074
0.0050
0.0011
0.0001
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

Q=150 0=180
0.1326
0.1326
0.1109
0.1103
0.0585
0.0596
0.0001
0.0000
0.0836
0.0836
0.0676
0.0669
0.0336
0.0323
0.0000
0.0000
0.0444
0.0444
0.0343
0.0335
0.0148
0.0135
0.0000
0.0000
0.0258
0.0258
0.0190
0.0185
0.0072
0.0063
0.0000
0.0000
0.0151
0.0151
0.0106
0.0102
0.0033
0.0028
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

James R. Wertz, Microcosm, Inc.
Calendar time in the uSual form of date and time is used only for input and output.
because arithmetic is cumbersome in months, days, hours, minutes, and seconds.
Nonetheless, this is used for most human interaction with space systems because it's
the system with which we are most familiar. Even with date and time systems,
problems can arise, because time zones are different throughout the world and
spacecraft operations typically involve a worldwide network. The uniformly adopted
solution to this problem is to use the local standard time corresponding to 0 deg
longitude (i.e., the Greenwich meridian) as the assigned time for events anywhere in
the world or in space. This is referred to as Universal Time (UT), Greenwich Mean
Time (GMT), or Zulu (Z), all of which are equivalent for most practical spacecraft
operations. The name Greenwich Mean Time is used because 0 deg longitude is
defined by the site of the former Royal Greenwich Observatory in metropolitan
London.
Civil time, Tcivil> as measured by a standard wall clock or time signals, differs from
Universal Time by an integral number of hours, corresponding approximately to the
longitude of the observer. The approximate relation is:

Tcivil =UT ± (L + 7.5)115

TABLE 0-10. Geometric Factor for Earth Albedo on a Rat Plate for 11 = 150
Alt(km)

200
(0.0314 RE>

500
(0.0784RE>

1000
(0.158RE>

1500
(O.235RE>

2000

(0.314 RE>

GEO
(5.611 RE>

e
0
30
60
90
0
30
60
90
0
30
60
90
0
30
60
90
0
·30
60
90
0
30
60
90

FsJbedo
0=0
0.0139
0.0127
0.0082
0.0015
0.0034
0.0032
0.0022
0.0006
0.0003
0.0003
0.0002
0.0001
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

Q=30
0.0139
0.0126
0.0080
0.0013
0.0034
0.0032
0.0022
0.0004
0.0003
0.0003
0.0002
0.0001
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

0=60
0.0139
0.0124
0.0076
0.0008
0.0034
0.0031
0.0019
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0002
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

0=90
0.0139
0.0120
0.0069
0.0003
0.0034
0.0030
0.0017
0.0000
0.0003
0.0003
0.0001
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

Q=12O
0.0139
0.0117
0.0063
0.0000
0.0034
0.0028
0.0015
0.0000
0.0003
0.0002
0.0001
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

0=150 0=180
0.0139
0.0139
0.0113
0.0114
0.0058
0.0056
0.0000
0.0000
0.0034
0.0034
0.0027
0.0027
0.0012
0.0012
0.0000
0.0000
0.0003
0.0003
0.0002
0.0002
0.0001
0.0001
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

(E-l)

where Tcivil and UT are in hours, and L is the longitude in degrees with the plus sign
corresponding to East longitude and the minus sign corresponding to West longitude.
The conversion between civil time and Universal Time for most North American and
European time zones is given in Table E-L Substantial variations in time zones are
created for political convenience. In addition, most of the United States and Canada
observe Daylight Savings Time from the first Sunday in April until the last Sunday in
October. Most European countries observe daylight savings time (called "summer
time") from the last Sunday in March to the first Sunday in October. Many countries
in the southern hemisphere also maintain daylight savings time, typically from
October to March. Countries near the equator typically do not deviate from standard
time.
Calendar time is remarkably inconvenient for computation, particularly over long
time intervals of months or years. We need an absolute time that is a continuous count
of time units from some arbitrary reference. The time interval between any two events
may then be found by simply subtracting the absolute time of the second event from
that of the first. The universally adopted solution for astronomical problems is the
Julian Day, ill, a continuous count of the number of days since Greenwich noon
(12:00
on January 1,4713 BC'", or, as astronome.rs now say, -4712. Because
Julian Days start at noon UT, they will be a half day off with respect to civil dates.
While this is inconvenient for transforming from civil dales to Julian dates, it was
usefuIfor astronomers because the date didn't change in the middle of the night (for
European observers).

un

T
914
TABLE E-1.

915

Universal Time and JuHan Dates

AppendixE
nme Zones In North America, Europe, and Japan. In most of the United
States, Daylight Savings TIme Is used from the first Sunday In AprD until the last
Sunday in October. In Europe, the equivalent "summer time" Is used from the last
Sunday in March to the first Sunday In October.

TABLE E-2. Julian Date at the Beginning of Each Year from 1990 to 2031. Sea text for
explanation of use. The day number for the beginning of the year Is caDed "Jan.
0.0" (actually Dec. 31st of the preceding year) so that day numbers can be found
by simply using dates. Thus, Jan. 1 Is day number 1 and has a JD 1 greater than
thet for Jan. O. * = leap year.

nmeZone

Standard Meridian
(Deg, East Long.)

UT Minus Standard
nme(Hours)

UT Minus Daylight
nme(Hours)

Atlantic

300

4

3

Year

JD 2,400,000+
for Jan 0.0 lIT

Year

JD 2,400,000+
fOr Jan 0.0 lIT

Year

JD 2,400,000+
for Jan 0.0 UT

Eastern

285

5

4

1990

47,891.5

2004*

53,004.5

2018

58,118.5

Central

270

6

5

Mountain

255

7

6

Pacffic

240

8

7

Alaska

225

9

8

Hawaii

210

10

NA

1991

48,256.5

2005

53,370.5

2019

58,483.5

1992*

48,621.5

2006

53,735.5

2020*

58,848.5

1993

48,987.5

2007

54,100.5

2021

59,214.5

1994

49.352.5

2008*

54,465.5

2022

59,579.5

Japan

135

-9

NA

1995

49,717.5

2009

54,831.5

2023

59,944.5

Central Europe

15

-1

-2

1996*

50,082.5

2010

55,196.5

2024*

60,309.5

United Kingdom

0

0

-1

1997

50,448.5

2011

55,561.5

2025

60,675.5

As described below, there are four general approaches for converting between calendar dates and Julian dates.

1998

50,813.5

2012·

55,926.5

2026

61,040.5

1999

51,178.5

2013

56,292.5

2027

61,405.5

Table Look-Up
Tabulations of the current Julian Date are in most astronomical ephemerides and
almanacs. Table E-2 lists the Julian Dates at the beginning of each year from 1990
through 2031. To find the Julian Date for any given calendar date, simply add the day
number within the year (and fractional day number, if appropriate) to the Julian Date
for Jan 0.0 of that year from Table E-2. Day numbers for each day of the year are on
many calendars or can be found by adding the date to the day number for day 0 of the
month from Table E-3. Thus 18:00 UT on April 15, 2002 = day number 15.75 + 90 =
105.75 in 2002 = JD 105.75 + 2,452,2745 =JD 2,452,380.25.
To convert from Julian Days to dates, determine the year in which the Julian Date
falls from Table E-2. Subtract the Julian Date from the JD for January 0.0 of that year
to determine the day number within the year. This can be converted to a date (and time,
if appropriate) by using day numbers on a calendar or subtracting from the day number
for the beginning of the appropriate month from Table E-3. Thus, from Table E-2,
JD 2,451,608.25 is in the year 2000. The day number is 2,451,608.25 -2,451,543.5 =
64.75. From Table E-3, this is 18:00 UT, March 4, 2000.

2000·

51,543.5

2014

56,657.5

2028*

61,770.5

2001

51,909.5

2015

57,022.5

2029

62, 136.5

2002

52,274.5

2016·

57,387.5

2030

62,501.5

2017

57,753.5

2031

62,866.5

Software Routines Using Integer Arithmetic
A particularly clever procedure for finding the Julian Date, JD, associated with any
current year, Y, month, M, and day of the month, D, is given by Fliegel and Van
* This strange starting point was suggested by an Italian scholar of Greek and Hebrew, Joseph
Scaliger, in 1582 as the beginning of the current Julian period of 7,980 years. This period is
the product of three numbers: the solar cycle, or the interval at which all dates recur on the
same days of the week (28 years); the lunar cycle, containing an integral number of lunar
months (19 years); and the indiction or the tax period introduced by the Emperor Constantine
in 313 AD (15 years). The last time that these started together was 4713 BC and the next time
will be 3267 AD. Scaliger was interested in reducing the astronomical dating problems ass0ciated with calendar reforms of his time and his proposal had the convenient selling point that
it pre-dated the ecclesiastically approved date of creation, October 4, 4004 BC.

2003
TABLE E-3.

52,639.5

Day Numbers for Day 0.0 of Each Month. Leap years (In which February has 29
days) are those evenly divisible by 4. However, years evenly divisible by 100 are
not leap years, except thet those evenly divisible by 400 are. Leap years are
indicated by • In TableE-2.
Month

Non-Leap Years

Leap Years

January

0

0

February

31

31

March

59

60

April

90

91

May

120

121

June

151

152

July

181

182

August

212

213

September

243

244

October

273

274

November

304

305

. December

334

335

AppendixE,

916

Universal Time and Julian Dates

Flandern [1968] as a computer statement using integer arithmetic. Note that all of the
variables must be defined as integers (i.e.• any remainder after a division must be
truncated) and that both the order of the computations and the parentheses are critical.
This procedure works in FORTRAN, C, C++, and Ada for any date on the Gregorian
calendar that yields JD > O. (Add 10 days to the JD for dates on the Julian calendar
prior to 1582.)
JD O= D - 32,075 + 1461 x (Y + 4800 + (M -14)/12)/4
+ 367 x (M - 2 - (M - 14)112 x 12)/12
-3 x «Y + 4900 + (M -14) 112) 1100) 14

(E-2a)

Here IDo is the Julian Day beginning at noon UT on the given date and must be an
integer. For a fractional day, F, in UT (i.e., day number D.F), the floating point Julian
Day is given by:
JD= JDo + F -0.5

(E-2b)

For example, the Julian Day beginning at 12:00 UT on December 25,2007 (Y = 2007,
M = 12, D = 25) is JD 2,454,460 and 6:00 UT on that date (F = 0.25) is ID
2,454,459.75.
The inverse routine for computing the date from the Julian Day is given by:

917

arithmetic. Thus, using the same variables as above, we can rewrite Eqs. (E-2) for
computation of JD from the date as:
C = lRUNC«M - 14)112)

(E-5a)

JD(). = D - 32,075 + lRUNC(l,461 x (Y + 4,800 + C)/4)
+ lRUNC(367 x (M - 2 - C x 12)/12)
-lRUNC(3 x (TRUNC(Y + 4,900 + C) 1100) 14)

(E-Sb)

JD = IDo + F - 0.5

(E-5c)

where again JDo. Y, M, D, and C are integers and F and JD are real numbers. Applying
the same rules to Eq. (E-3) gives the inverse formula for the date in terms of JD as:
L = ID + 68,569

(E-6a)

N = lRUNC«4 x L) 1146,097)

(E-6b)

L = L -lRUNC« 146097 x N + 3) 14)

(E-6c)

1= lRUNC«4000 x (L + 1» 11,461,001)

(E-6d)

L = L -lRUNC«I,461 x I) 14) + 31

(E-6e)

J = lRUNC«80 x L) 12,447)

(E-6t)

L = JDo+ 68.569

(E-3a)

D = L -lRUNC«2,447 x J) I 80)

(E-6g)

N = (4 x L) 1146,097

(E-3b)

L = lRUNC(J 111)

(E-6h)

L =L - (146097 xN + 3) 14

(E-3c)

M=J+2-12xL

(E-6i)

1= (4000 x (L + 1» 11,461,001

(E-3d)

Y= l00x(N-49)+I+L

(E-6j)

L = L - (1461 x I) 14 + 31

(E-3e)

J = (80 x L) 12,447

(E-3t)

D = L - (2447 x J) 1 80

(E-3g)

L=J/ll

(E-3h)

M=J+2-12xL

(E-3i)

Y = 100 x (N - 49) + I + L

(E-3j)

where integer arithmetic is used throughout. Y, M, and D are the year, month, and day,
and I, J, L, and N are intermediate variables. Finally, again using integer arithmetic,
the day of the week, W, corresponding to the Julian Date beginning at 12:00 on that
day is given by:
W = JDo-7 x «JD + 1)/7) +2

(E-4)

where W = 1 corresponds to Sunday. Thus, December 25, 2007 falls on Tuesday.
Software Routines Without Integer Arithmetic
While most computer languages provide integer arithmetic, spreadsheets such as
Excel or MatLab typically do not. (See below for use of Excel and MatLab DATE
functions.) Similar capabilities are available using integer (!NT) or truncation
(TRUNC in Excel, FIX in MatLab) functions. INT and lRUNC are identical for
positive numbers, but differ for negative numbers: INT(-3.1) = -4. whereas
lRUNC(-3.1) = -3. It is the lRUNC or FIX function which is equivalent to integer

where the variables are the same as Eq. (E-3), except that D is now a real number corresponding to the date and fraction of a day. Finally, Eq. (E-4) for the day of the week
becomes:
W= JD -7 xlRUNC «JD + 1.5) 17) + 2.5
= JD -7 x INT«JD + 1.5) 17) + 25

(E-7)

where 1 $ W < 2 corresponds to Sunday. The examples given above can also serve as
test cases for Eqs. (E-5), (E-6), and (E-7).
Modified JuHan Date
The Julian Date presents minor problems for space applications. Because it was
introduced principally for astronomical use, Julian Dates begin at 12:00 UT rather than
ohours UT, as the civil calendar does (thus the 0.5 day differences in Table E-2). In
addition, the 7 digits required for the Julian Date did not permit the use of single
precision arithmetic in older computer programs. This is no longer a problem with
modern computer storage and number formats. Nonetheless, various forms of truncated Julian dates have gained at least some use.
The most common of the truncated Julian dates for astronomical and astronautics
use is the Modified Julian Date, MID, given by:
MID = JD - 2,400,000.5

(E-8)

MID'begins at midnight, to correspond with the civil calendar. Thus, in using
Table E-2, the MID is given by adding the day of the year (plus fractions of a day, if

918

T,
AppendixE

919

AppendixF
Units and Conversion Factors

appropriate) to the number in the table, with the ".5" at the end of the table-listing
dropped. For example, theMJD for 18:00 UT on Jan. 3,2002 = MID 52,277.75. The
definition of the MID given here is that adopted by the International Astronomical
Union in 1997. Note, however, that other definitions of the MID have been used. Thus,
the most unambiguous approach remains the use of the full Julian Date.
Spreadsheets such as Excel or MatLab
.Spreadsheets, such as Excel or MatLab, typically store dates internally as some
form of day cOunt and allow arithmetic operations, such as subtraction. Thus, we can
either subtract two dates directly to determine a time interval or convert them to Julian
Dates by simply finding the additive constant, K, given by:
K=JD-I

(E-9)

where I is the internal number representing a known date, JD. Once this is determined,
then the JD for any date is:
JD=K+ I

(E-I0)

Many versions of Excel use Jan. 1,1904, as "day 0," such that KExcel = 2,416,480.5.
However, this should be checked for individual programs because other starting points
are sometimes used and the starting point is a variable parameter in some versions of
Excel. While this can be a very convenient function. Excel date routines run only from
1904 to 2078.
MatLab typically uses Jan. 1, 0000, 0:0:0 as "day 0." Thus, in the formula above,
KMatLab = 1,721,058.5.
Any of the day counting approaches will work successfully over its allowed range.
However, systems intended for general mathematics or business use may not account
correctly for leap years and calendar changes when historical times or times far in the
future are being evaluated. Thus, the use of the full Julian Date remains the most
unambiguous solution, particularly if a program or result is to be used by more than
one person or program. For a more extended discussion of time systems, see for example, Seidelmann [1992] or Wertz [2001],

References

Robert BeD, Microcosm, Inc.
The metric system of units, offidally known as the International System of Units,
or SI, is used throughout this book, with the exception that angular measurements are
usually expressed in degrees rather than the SI unit of radians. By international agreement, the fundamental SI units of length, mass, and time are defined as follows (see
National Institutes of Standards and Technology, Special Publication 330 [1991]):
The meter is the length of the path traveled by light in vacuum during a
time interval of 11299,792,458 of a second.
The kilogram is the mass of the international prototype of the kilogram.
The second is the duration of 9,192,631,770 periods of the radiation
corresponding to the transition between two hyperfme levels of the
ground state of the cesium-133 atom.
Additional base units in the SI system are the ampere for electric current, the kelvin
for thermodynamic temperature, the mole for amount of substance, and the candela for
luminous intensity. Taylor [1995] provides an excellent summary of SI units for
scientific and technical use.
The names of multiples and submultiples of SI units are formed by application of
the following prefixes:
Factor by WhIch
Unit Is MulUpllec:I

1()24
1()21
10'8
10'5
1012

Fliegel, Henry F. and Thomas C. Van Flandern. 1968. "A Machine Algorithm for
Processing Calendar Dates." Communications of the ACM, vol. n, p. 657.

1()9
106

Seidelmann, P. Kenneth. 1992. Explanatory Supplement to the Astronomical
Almanac. Mill Valley, CA: University Science Books.

1()3
1()2
101

Wertz, James R. 2001. Mission Geometry; Orbit and Constellation Design and Management. El Segundo, CA, and Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Microcosm Press and
Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Prefix

Symbol

Factor by WhIch
Unit Is MulUpllec:l

yetta

Y
Z
E

10-1
10-2
10-3

zetta
exa

pata

P

1(1""6

tara

T

glga

G

10-9
10-12

mega

M

kDo
hecto

k
h

deka

da

10-'5
10-'8
10-21
10-24

PrefIx

Symbol

decl

d

cent!

C

mUll
micro
nano

m

plco

P

femto

f
a

alto
zepto

yocto

"n
z
Y

For each quantity listed below, the SI unit and its abbreviation are given in brackets.
For convenience in computer use, most conversion factors are given to the greatest
available accuracy. Note that some conversions are exact definitions and some (speed
of light, astronomical unit) depend on the value of physical constants. ", . ," indicates
a repeating decimal. All notes are on the last page of the list.

920

To cowertfrom

AppenttixF

To

Acceleration [meterlsecondz, mlsZ]
Gal (galileo)
mls2
Inch/second2, inls2
mls2
FooUsecond2,ft1s2
mls2
Free fall (standard), g
mls2
Angular Acceleration [radianlsecond2, rad/sZ]
Degrees/second2, degls2
radls2
Revolutionslsecond2, rev/s2
Revolutionslminute2, rev/min2

radls2
radls2

Revolutionslminute2
Radianslsecond2, radls2

degls2
degls2

RevolutionslsecondZ, rev/s2

degls2

Units and Conversion Factors

Multiply by

Notes

0.01
0.0254
0.3048
9.80665

1rI180
= 0.017 453 292 519 943 295 77
2x
= 6.283 185307 179586477
x 11,800
=1.745329251994329577 x 10-3
0.1
180/x
=57.29577951 308 232 088
360

E
E
E
E

E
E
E
E
E
E

Angular Area [sr], book also uses degZ

Degree2, deg2

Sf

Minute2, min2

sr

Second2, s2

Sf

Steradian, sr

deg2

Minute2, min2

deg2

Second2, s2

deg2

Steradian, Sf

rad2

(1rI180)2
'" 3.046174197 867 086 x 10-4
WIO,800)2
= 8.461 594 994 075 237 x Io-B
(1rI648 000)2
'" 2.350 443 053 909 289 x 10-4
(1801x)2
= 3.282 806 350 OIl 744 x 103
113,600
=2.777...x 10-4
(113,600)2
=7.716049382716049 x lo-B
I rad2

To cowertfrom

T.o

Angular Momentum [kilogram· meterz/second, kg • m2/s]
Gram· cm2/second, g • cni2/s
kg • m2/s
1 x 10-7
2
2
2
2.926396 534 292 x 10-4
Ibm· inch /second, Ibm • in /s
kg ·m /s
9.415402 418968 x 10-3
Slug· inch2/second, slug· in2/s
kg·m2/s
0.042 140 110093 80
Ibm· foot2/second, Ibm· ft.2/s
kg ·m2/s
0.112 984 829 027 6
Inch ·Ibf· second, in ·lbf • s
kg·m2/s
1.355817948 331
Slug· foot2/second, slug· ft.2/s
kg ·m2/s
= foot· lbf· second, ft. • lbf • s

E

E
E
E
E

Angular Measure [radian, rad]. This book uses degree (abbreviated "deg") as the basic
unit.
Degree, deg
rad
1rI180
= 0.017 453292 519 943 295 77
E
Minute (of arc), rinn
rad
1rII0,800
= 2.908 882 086 657 216 x 10-4
E
Second (of arc), S
rad
1rI648 000
=4.848136811 095 360 x 10-6
E
Radian, rad
deg
= 180/x
= 57.295 779 513 082320 877
E
Minute (of arc), min
deg
1160
=0.01666...
E
Second (of arc), s
deg
113,600
= 2.777.. .x 10-4
E

Notes
E
E
D
D
D
D

Anguh.r Velocity [radian/second, rad/s]. This book uses degrees/second as the basic unit.
Degrees/second, degls

radls

Revolutionslminute, rpm

radls

Revolutionslsecond, rev/s

radls

Revolutionslminute, rpm
Radianslsecond, radls

degls
degls

Revolutionslsecond, revls

degls

E
E

Multiply by

921

Area [meter2, mZ]
Acre
Foot2, ft.2
Hectare
Inch2, in2
Mile2 (U.S. statute)
Yard2, ydZ
(Nautical mile)2

m2
m2
m2
m2

1rI180
.. 0.017 453 292 519 943 295 77
1rI30
.. 0.104 719 7551196597746
2x
= 6.283185307179586477
6
180/x
= 57.295 779 513082 320 88
360

E
E

E
E
E
E

m2
m2

4.046 856422 x 103
0.09290304
1 x 1()4
6.4516 x 10-4
2.589 110336 x 1()6
0.83612736
3.429 904 x 1()6

E
E
E
E
E
E
E

Density [kilogram/meter3, kglm3]
Gram/centimeter3, glcm3
Pound masslincb3, Ibmlin3
Pound masslfoot3, Ibmlft.3
Sluglft.3

kglm3
kglm3
kglm3
kglm3

LOx 103
2.767990471 020 x 1()4
16.01846337396
515.378 818 393 2

E
D
D
D

Electric Charge [coulomb, C]
Abcoulomb
Faraday (based on carbon-12)
Faraday (chemical)
Faraday (physical)
Statcoulomb

C
C
C
C
C

10
9.648 70x 1()4
'9.64957 x 1()4
9.652 19 x 1()4
3.335641 x 10-10

m2

E
NlST
NIST
NIST
NIST

Electric Conductanee [siemens, S]
S
Abmho
Mho (.Q-l)
S

I x 1()9
I

E
E

Electric Current [ampere, AJ
Abampere

10

E

A

922

AppendixF

To convertfrom
Gilbert
Statampere

Units and Conversion Factors

To

Multiply by

A

10/4n
'" 0.795 774 715 459 5
3.335641 x 1<r1O

A

Notes

Ughtyear

E
NIST

Electric Field Intensity
[volt/meter =kilogram • meter· ampere-I. second-J , Vim =kg • m • A-I. s-3]
Electric Potential Difference
[volt wattlampere kilogram ·meter2 ·ampere-l· second-J, V51W/A 51kg ·m2 • A-I's-3]
Abvolt
V
1 x 10-8
E
Statvolt
V
299.7925
NIST

=

=

Electric Resistance
[ohm 5: volt/ampere 5: kilogram • meter2 • ampere-2 • second-3, n =VIA 5: kg • m 2 • A-2 • s-3]
n I x 10--9
E
Abohm
Statohm
n
8.987552 x 1011
NIST
Energy or Torque
[joule =newton ·meter =kilogram
British thermal unit, Btu (mean)
Calorie (IT), cal
Kilocalorie (IT). kcal
Electron volt, eV
Erg 5: gram • cm'l.fs2
pole· em • oersted
Foot poundal
Foot Ibf slug· foot2/s2
Kilowatt hour. kW • hr
Ton eqWvalent ofllff

=

=

• meter2/s2 , J =N • m 5: kg • m2/sZ]
J
1.05505585262 x 1()3
J
4.186 8
J
4.1868 x 1()3
J
1.602 17733 x 1<r19
J

J
J
J

J

1 x 1<r7
0.042140 110093 80
1.355817948 331 4
3.6x 1()6
4.184 x 109

E

E
E
C
E
D
E
E
E

=

Force [newton kilogram • meterlsecond2, N 5: kg • m IsZ]
Dyne
N I x I<rS
Kilogram-force (kgt)
N
9.806 65
Ounce force (avoirdupois)
N
0.278013 850953 8
0.138254 954 376
Poundal
N
Pound force (avoirdupois),
N
4.448 221 615260 5
Ibf 5: slug· foot/s2

E
E
D
E
E

muminance [lux e candela' steradian/meter2, Ix 5: cd . srtmZ]
Footcandle
Phot

cd· sr/m2
cd· sr/m2

10.763910416709 70
1 x 1()4

E
E

I x 1<rIO
1.495978706 6 x lOll
1.4959789 x lOll
6.378 136 49 x 1()6
6.378 14 x 1()6
1 x l<r ls
0.3048
0.0254

E
AA
NIST
IERS
AQ
E
E
E

Length [meter, mJ
Angstrom, A
Astronomical unit (SI)
Astronomical unit (nufio)
Earth equatorial radius, RE

m
m
m
m

Fermi (1 fermi = 1 fin)
Foot,ft
Inch, in

m
m
m

To convert from
Micron,~

Mil (I<rJ inch)
Mile (U.S. statute), mi
Nautical mile (U.S.). NM
Parsec (IAU)
Solar radius
Yard, yd

923

To

Multiply by

m
m
m
m
m
m
m·
m

9.460 730 472 580 8 x 1015
1 x 10""6
2.54 x l<rs
1.609 344 x 1()3
1.852 x 1()3
3.085 677 597 49 x 1016
6.960 00 x lOS
0.9144

Luminance [candeIalmeter2 5: cdlmZ]
cdlm2
Footlambert
cdlml
Lambert
cdlm2
Stilb

Notes

=3.426 259 099 635 39
(lin) x 1()4 co 3.183 098 862 x 1()3
1 x 1()4

Magnetic Field Strength, H [ampere turnlmeter, AlmJ
Oersted (EMU)
AIm
(1/4n) x 1()3
'" 79.577 471 545 947 667 88
Magnetic Flux
[weber 5: volt· s kilogram • meter2 • ampere-1esecond-2, Wb 5: V • S
Maxwell (EMU)
Wb
1 x 10-8
Wb
1.256637 x 1<r7
Unit pole

=

D
E
E
E
E
D
AA
E
E
E
E

E,1

=kg • mZ • A-I. s-Z]

Magnetic Induction, B
.
[testa 5: weberlmeter2 kilogram • ampere-I. second-2, T 5: WbJm2 5: kg • A-I. s-Z]
Gamma (EMU) (y)
T
1 x 10-9
Gauss (EMU)
T
1 x 10-4

E
NIST

=

E,1
E,1

Magnetic Dipole Moment
[weber· meter 5: kilogram· meterl • ampere-I. second-2, Wb • m 5: kg . m3 . A-I. s-2J
Pole' centimeter (EMU)
Wb • m
4n x l<rlo
'" 1.256637061435917295 x Icr9E,1
Gauss • centimeter3 (Practical)
Wb • m
I x 1<r10
E,I

=

Magnetic Moment [ampere turn . meter2 jouleltesla, A • m 2 5: JIT}
Ix Ht-3
A·ml
Abampere· centimeter2(EMU)
2
2
I x 10-4
A·m
Ampere' centimeter

E,I
E,l

Mass [kilogram, kg]
Y(= 1 J.Ig)
Atomic unit (electron)
Atomic mass unit (unified), amu
Metric carat
Metric ton
Ounce mass (avoirdupois); oz
Pound mass,Ibm (avoirdupois)
Slug
Short ton (2.000 Ibm)
Solilrmass

E
C
C
E
E
E
E
D
E
AA

kg
kg
kg
kg
kg
kg
kg
kg
kg
kg

1 x 1<r9
9.109 389 7 x I<rJ1
1.660 540 2 x 1<r27
2.0x 10-4
1 x 103
0.028 349 231 25
0.453592 37
14.593 902 937 21
907.184 74
1.9891 x 1()30

924

AppendixF

To convertfrom

Units and Conversion Factors

Multiply by

To

Moment of Inertia [kilogram· meterl, kg • mZJ
Gram • centimeter2, gm • cm2
kg • m2
Pound mass· inch2, Ibm • in2
kg· m2
Pound mass· foot2,Ibm • ft2
kg • m2
Slug· inch2, slug· in2
kg· m2
Inch· pound force' s2, in ·Ibf· s2 kg· m2
Slug· foot2 = ft • Ibf· s2
kg • m2

1 x 10-7
2.926396534 292 x 10-4
4.214011 009 380x-l0-2
9.415402 418968 x 10-3
0.112 984 829 027 6
1.355817948 3314
Power [watt 51 joule/second 51 kilogram' meter2/second3, W 51 J/s 51 kg • m 21s3]
Foot· pound force/second, ft Ibfls
Hw:sepower (550 ft ·lbfls), hp
Hw:sepower (electrical), hp
Solar luminosity

W
W
W

1.355 817 948 331
745.699 871 582 3
746.0
3.845 x 1()26

W

Notes

E
E
D
D
D
E

D
D
E
AQ

Pressure or Stress
[pascal 51 newtonlmeter2 51 kilogram· meter1 • second-2, Pa 51 Nfm2 51 kg • m-l • s-ZJ
Atmosphere, atm
Pa
1.013 25 x lOS
E
Bar
Pa
1 x lOS
E
Centimeter of mercury (0" C)
Pa
'" 1.333 223 874 145 x 103
E
Dynelcentimeter2, dynelcm2
Pa
0.1
E
Inch of mercury (32' F)
Pa
3.386388640341 x 103
E
Pound forcelfoot2, Ibflft2, psf
Pa
47.880258 980 34
D
Pound forcelinch2, Ibflin2, psi
Pa
6.894757293168 x 103
D
Torr (0' C)
Pa
(l01325n60)
'" 133.322368 421 052631
E
Solid AngIe (See Angular Area)
Specific Heat Capacity
[joule· kilogram-I. kelviJrl
cal· g-I • K-I (mean)
Btu • lbm-I • "F-I (mean)

51

meter2 • second2 • kelviJrl , J . kg-I. I{-l 51 m 2 • s2 . K-I)
J • kg-I. K-I 4.18680 x 103
E
J. kg-I. K-I 4.18680 x 103
E

Stress (see Pressure)
Temperature [kelvin, K)
Celsius,oC
Fahrenheit, "F
Rankine OR
Fahrenheit, "F
Rankine"R

Time [second, s]
Sidereal day, d,. (ref. = 1)
"Ephemeris day, de

=
=
=

C

Thermal Conductivity [watt· meterl • keIviJrl
W .m-l . K-1 5lkg. m· s-3. K-l]
cal· cnrl . s-I • K-I (mean)
Btu· fLl • hrl • "F-I (mean)

=

tK tc + 273.15
tK = (519) (tF + 459.67)
tK (519) tR
tc (5/9) (tF- 32.0)
tc (519) (tR - 491.67)

K
K
K
C

51

kilogram • meter· second-3 • kelvin-I,

W • nr l . K-I 418.68
W • m- I • K-I 1.730734 666 371 39

s
s

E
E
E
E
E

8.6164100352 x 1()4
= 23h 56m 4.100 352s
8.64 x 1()4

E
D

AQ
AQ

To convertfrom
Ephemeris day, de
Keplerian period of a satellite
in low-Earth orbit

To

Multiply by

d,.

1.002 737 795 056 6

min

1.658669010 080 x 10-4 x a3f2
(a in km)

Keplerian period of a
satellite of the Sun

n

Tropical year (ref.=
Tropical year (ref.= 1)
Sidereal year (ref.=fixed stars)
Sidereal year (ref.=flXed stars)
Calendar year (365 days), yr
Julian century
Gregorian calendar century

92S

de
s

de
se

de
s
d
d

Notes
AQ

Table 6-2

3.652568 954 757 x
102 x a3f2 (a in AU)
3.155692 597 47x 107
365.242198781
3.155814976320 x 107
365.256363
3.153 6x 107
36,525
36,524.25

AA

AA
D
AA
AA
E
E
E

Torque (see Energy)
Velocity [meter/second, mls]
Footlminute, ftlmin
Inch/second, ips
Kilometerlhour, kmIhr
Footlsecond, fps or ftls
Mileslhour, mph
Knot (international)
Miles/minute, milmin
Miles/second, mils
Velocity of Light

trJIs

mls
mls
mls
mls

mls
mls
mls
mls

5.08 x 10-3
0.0254
(3.6)-1 = 0.277777 ...
0.3048
0.44704
(1852/3600) = 0.514444...
26.8224
1.609 344 x 103
2.99792458 x lOS

Viscosity [pascal· second", kilogram • meterl • second-I, Pa • s '" kg • uri • s-I]
Stoke
m2/s
1.0 x 10-4
Foot2 • second, ft2 • S
m2/s
0.09290304
Pound mass' foor l • second-I,
Ibm· fLl • s-I
Pa·s
1.488 163 943 570
Pound force' secondlfoet2,
Ibf· stft2
47.880 258 98034
Pa's
Poise
Pa·s
0.1
PoundaI secondlfoot2,
poundaI stft2
1.488163943570
Pa's
Slug· foor l • second-I,
slug· fLl • s-I
47.880 258 980 34
Pa's
(Pa.srl
Rhe
10
Volume [meter3, m3]
A ( IA = 1 jJL = 1 x 1Q-6 L)
Foot3, ft3
Gallon (U.S. liquid), gal
Inch3, fn 3

m3
m3
m3

m3

1 x 10-9
2.831684 659 2 x 10-2
3.785411784x 10-3
1.6387064 x 10-5

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

D
D
E
D
D
E
E
E
E
E

926

AppendixF

To convertfrom

Liter, L
Ounce (U.S. fluid), oz
Pint (U.S. liquid), pt
Quart, qt
Stere (st)
Yard3, ydl

Units and Conversion FactoN-

To

Multiply by

m3
m3
m3
m3
m3
m3

1 x 10-3
2.95735295625 x 10-5
4.731764 73 x 1()-4
9.463529 46 x 1()-4

Notes

1
0.764 554 857 984

E
E
E
E
E
E

Notes for the preceding table:
Values are those of Astronomical Almanac [Hagen and Boksenberg, 1991].
AA
AQ
Values are those of Astrophysical Quantities [Cox, 1991].
C
Values are those of Cohen and Taylor [1986).
Values that are derived from exact quantities, rounded off to 13 significant figures.
D
E
(Exact) indicates that the conversion is exact by definition of the non-SI unit or that it

is obtained from other exact conversions.
IERS Numerical standards of the lERS.
NIST Values are those of National Institute of Standards and Technology [McCoubrey,
1991)
(1) Care should be taken in transforming magnetic units, because the dimensionality of mag-

netic quantities (8, H, etc.) depends on the system of units. Most of the conversions given
here are between SI and EMU (electromagnetic). The following equations hold in both
sets of units:

i'

'T = mxB= dxH

=

j.LII
m = fA for a current loop in a plane
d = J.IDl
B

,

I ,
f!

I

, ,!

,

I

I

I:

II, !
i'

with the following definitions:
T == torque
B == magnetic induction (commonly called "magnetic field")
H == magnetic field strength or magnetic intensity
m == magnetic'moment
I == current loop
A == vector normal to the plane of the current loop (in the direction of the angular
velocity vector of the current loop about the center of the loop) with magnitude
equal to the area of the loop.
'
d == magnetic dipole moment
1.1 == magnetic permeability

The permeability of vacuum, !lo, has the following values, by definition:
!lo= 1 (dimensionless)
EMU
J.Io==41tx 10-7 N1A2

SI

Therefore, in electromagnetic units in vacuum, magnetic induction and magnetic field strength
are equivalent and the magnetic moment and magnetic dipole moment are equivalent. For practical purposes ofmagnetostatics, space is a vacuum but the spacecraft itselfmay have 1.1 '" Il&

Useful Mathematical Constants and Values
Constant

Value

1t

.. 3.141592653 589 793 238 462 643

e

.. 2.718 281 828459045 2a5 360 287

en

.. 23.140 692 632 n9 269 006

log,oX

.. 0.434 294 481 903 251 827 651128 910ger

10QaX

.. 2.302 585 092 994 045 684 017 991 loglo%

10ge1t

.. 1.144 729 885 849 400 174143 427

(A)
(A)
(A)
(A)
(A)
(A)

(A) are from The Handbook of Mathemalk:al FWlCIions, with FormulBS, Graphs, and
Mathematical Tables [Abramowitz and Stegun, 1970)

References
Abramowitz, Milton and Irene A. Stegun, eds. 1970. The Handbook of Mathematical
Functions with Formulas, Graphs, and MatheTfUltical Tables. New York: Dover.
Cohen, E. Richard and B.N. Taylor, 1986. CODATA Bulletin No. 63, Nov. New York:
Pergamon Press.
Cox, A.N. ed. 1999. Astrophysical Quantities. New York: Springer-Verlag
Hagen, James B. and A. Boksenberg, eds. 1991. The Astronomical Almanac. Nautical
Almanac Office, U.S. Naval Observatory and H. M. Nautical Almanac Office.
1992. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
McCarthy, Dennis D., USNO. 1996. ''Technical Note 21." IERS Conventions.
McCoubrey, Arthur O. 1991. Guidefor the Use of the International System of Units
(SI). National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIS1). Special Publication
811, U.S. Department of Commerce: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Seidelmann, Kenneth P., USNO. ed. 1992. The Explanatory Supplement to the
Astronomical AITfUlnac. Mill Valley, CA: University Science Books.
Taylor, Barry N. 1991. The International System of Units (SI). National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST), Special Publication 811, U.S. Department of
Commerce: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Index
~sIgJDa dfSign process

1950 coordinates

:zooo coordinates

746-747,781

en
en

-A-

(

AAR (See Area Access Rate)
261
AberratioDS, optical
Absolute stationkeepIDg
vs. relative stationkeeping
508-509
Absorptivity (See also emissivity)
435-436
130,266,284
atmospheric ttansIVission
436
table of values
Acceleration
units and conversion factors
920
Acceleration loads
739
520
AeceptaD£e tests
163
Access area
fot typical spacecraft
167
instruments
table of values Inside rear cover (col. 1-4)
Acoustic environment
741
(oflannch vehicle)
sound pressure level
742
522
Acquisition reform
ACR (See Area Coverage Rate)
ACS (attitude control system; See Attitude
Determination and Control subsystem)
428
Active thermal control
ACTS (Advanced Commnnications
Technology Satellite)
541
572-573,576
antenna
Acts of US. Congress (See also
Congress; treaties; individual acts)
834
Buy America Act
Commercial Launch Act of 1984
830-831
1988 amendment
environmental impact
835
assessment
830-831
insurance cap
power over commercial
827
launch
824
reason fot
826
requires launch license
Commercial Space Act of 1998
826
GPS spectrum
827
launch site upgrades
822
reusable launchers
Export Administration Act
834

Export Control Act
Federal Tort Claims Act

834
830

National Environmental
834
Policy Act
Actuators (See Attitude control
actuators, Attitude determinLltion
303
and control subsystem)
Ada (com.puter language)
666
(See also software)
Adaptive differential pulse code
549
modulation
ADCS (See Attitude determinLltion
and control subsystem)
215
AE8 (radiation belt electron model)
179,184
Aeroassist trajectory
Aerodynamic drag
(See Atmospheric drag)
Aerodynamic loads
738,739
Aerodynamic stabilization
use on small satellites
864
Aerodynamic torques
(See also Torque)
formulafot
324, 366-367
Aerogel
437,438
as thermal insulation
Aerospace Ground Equipment
cost estimates
796
AFSCN (See Air Force Satellite
Control Network)
754-755
Agile manufacturing
Agreement on astronaut re$CUe and
823-824
return of spacecraft
Air Force Satellite Control Network
(AFSCN) (See also ground systems) 637~38

parameters fot
usefotDMSP
use fot FLTSATCOM
use of DSCS-llI
Airy dlsk (in optics)
Airy, Sir George
AKM (apogee kick motor;
See also Kick motor, Kick stage)
cost estimates
Albedo
definition of
geometry factors fot
planets
ALEXIS (small X-ray
astronomy satellite)
cost estimate
redundancy on

547-548
635
635
534
263
264

306
795-796
432-434
432-433
907-908
434
858
874
877

930
Algorithms
first-order
37
system
57
Aliasing
282
Allocation ofrequJrements (See
Requirements ofa space mission)
Altitude maintenance (See also
Orbit nuzintenonce, almDspheric drag)
497
graph of required AV
177
Altitude plateaus, collStellation
198
A1mninum (See also Structural materials)
as rocket propellant
699
use of
465
properties of
466
thermal properties of
436
Ammonia dISsodation
697
AmmoDimn perchlorate
as rocket propellant
699
Ampere-hour capacity (See Batteries)
Amplifiers
solid-state
575
ttaveling-wave tube (TWfA)
575
AMSAT (satellite organization for
radio amateurs; See also OSCAR
satellites, Micro$at)
860,871
AMSAT (smaH satellite)
cost estimate
808
in geosynchronons orbit
86S-869
launch
865
mass distribution of
895-896
Analemma
122
Analog moduIation-techniqufS
(See also Data rates)
543
Analog sigonl processing (See signal
processing, tlIIalog)
AnalytIcal redundancy
779
Angn1ar atteleration
units and conversion factors
920
Angn1ar Impulse (See Angular
momentum; Disturbance torques)
estimate for spacecraft
323-328
Angular measure
units and conversion factors
920
Angn1ar momentum (See also Momentum
unloading; Momentum wheels; Torques) 354
estimate for spacecraft
323-328
FrreSat example
376
simplified equations for
370
units and conversion factors
921
Angn1ar motion
of a satellite seen from Earth
117-123
Angn1ar rate
units and conversion factors
920
Angn1ar resolution (See Beamwidth,
resolution)
265
Angn1ar velocity
units and conversion factors
921
Anik C (communications satellite)
633
Animation (mission utiIlty
technique)
65

Index

931

Index

AnomaHstlc year
898
Anomaly (failure) analysis
606
Anomaly, in an orbit (See also Mean anomaly,
Eccelllric antJ17Ully, True anomaly) 139-140
ANSI (software standards)
670
Antarctic Treaty
differeuc:es from Outer Space Treaty 825
AntennalJ (See also Footprint)
beamhopping tecJmiqne
573
computation of footprint
165-168
directioual accuracy of
322
efficiency
533
equation for
555-556
gain calculation
552-554
pointing method
319-320
system for ground station
624
thermal requirements for
428

types of

570-575

Anti-Ballistic Missile LlmitatiODS
Treaty (ADM)
825
AntIjIDllDliDg (ofRF signals) (see Jamming)
Antipode (or Antipoint)
99
Antisolarpoint
99
An (radiation belt proton model)
215
Aperture
computation for FireSat
288
numerical
261
optical
259,264
synthetic
265,275
Apogee Kick Motor (AKM); also
Apogee boost motor (See also
Kick motor; Kick stage)
306
Apollo (Moan mission)
cost estimate
808
in site science
244
use of fuel cells
409
Apparent motion of satellites
117-123
AppendagfS of spacecraft
303
examples of
309-311
effect on configuration
312-314
Application software
663
estimating resource needs
663-666
Applied axIaI loads
488
Apstar (commnnlcatiODS satellite)
regulatmy problem
821
An: (or arc segment)
99
Arc length measurement
99-100
ArcmInnte
920
Arc second
920
Arcjets (See Electric propulsion)
Architecture
communications
533-543
mission
10-11,32-37
mission, as cost structure
788
onboard processing
651~7
Area
units and conversion factors
916
Area Access Rate (AAR)
164
equations for
16S-169
table of values Inside rear cover (col. 5-8)

Area Coverage Rate (ACR)
164
computation example
169-170
equations for
116-117
for different instrumeut types
168
462,476
Area JIlOIlll9ll of inertia
equations for
476-477
sample computations
483,490-491
Area Sean:h Rate (See Area Coverage rate)
ArgumeIIt of latitude

(See also Orbit elements)
137
ArgumeIlt ofperlgee
(See also Orbit elements)
136
formulas for
902
732
Ariane launch system
adapter masses
736
and small satellites
865
728
chaJacteristics of
cost estimates
802
741
fundamental frequency
742
injection accuracy
reliability experience
727
user's guide for
743
Ariane Structure for Attac:hed Payloads
_ (ASAP) ring
857,859,865
Small satellite launch
Arms Export Control Act
834
Arrays, solar (See Solar arrays)
ASAP (Arlane Structure for Attached
Payloads) ring
857,859,865
Small satellite launch
Ascending node (See also Orbit elements;
136
Right ascension o/the ascending node)
Assembly
519
hardware nomenclature
658
Assembly languages
Assembly llne
for Iridium
762-764
for satellite manufacturing
654
26
Association of data
Asteroids (See also Meteoroids, Comets)
839-840
mining of
261
Astigmatism (aberration)
ASTP (smaH spacecraft)
854
characteristics of
ASTRID (smaH sateIIlte)
874
cost estimate
ASTRO (smaH spacecraft serifS) guidance and control
864
Astrodynamics (See also Orbits)
131-158
131
books on
Astronants
217
effect of solar particles on
u envoys of mankind"
823
823-824
rescue and return required
510
return from Moon
693
use of Manned Maneuvering Unit
899
Astronomical latitude
731
Atlas Centanr Iannch system
728
chaJacteristics of
802
cost estimates

741
fundamental frequency
742
injection accuracy
727
reliability experience
742
sound pressure level
526
tested shock levels
743
user's guide for
vibration tests for CODlpouents
526
Atmosphere (See also Atmospheric drag;
Atmospheric pressure)
207-212
attenuation (Iiuk budget)
564-565
density, effect on orbits
(See also Atmospheric drag) 2OS-209
25S-259
effect on payloads
722
effect on rocket performance
208
models of
211
scale height
Inside rear cover
table of values.
(coL 25)
207-212
structure of
2fJ1
temperature of
tnmsmission vs. wavelength
258
Atmospheric
density
Insiderear cover
table of values
(coL 26-28)
144-145
Atmospheric drag
179
effect on flY bUdget
722
effect on launch systems
206
effect on microgravity
2OS-211
effect on satellite lifetime
144-145
formulas for
508
maneuver to overcome
Inside rear cover
table of values
(coL 33-40)
to remove energy
184
from an orbit
Atmospheric pressure
690,691
effect on rocket performance
AtomIc oxygen
211-2]2
effect on space systems
ATS (See Advanced Technology Satellite)
322-323
Attitude capture
Attitude control (See Attitude
determination and control subsystem)
analogy with
498,510-51 1,512-514
orbit control
Attitude control actuators (See also COnIroi
momelll gyros; Magnetic torquers;
Momentum wheels; Reaction
303,325,36S-371
wheels; Thrusters)
368,370
angular momentum capacity
376
FireSat example
sizing
370
368
torque capability
Attitude Control System (ACS)
(See Attitude Determination and
COnIrol Subsystem)
Attitude Determination and
ControISu~(AJ)CS)

accuracy requirements

354-380
83-36,365

932

Index
angular impulse capability
angular impulse requirements
attitude control requirements
attitude control

techniques

323
326
319-320

31~3l4,319,359

components
3Tl,368-377
control algorithm definition
378
cost estimates
79S-m
definition of
302
design of
319-328, 356
failnre rates
769
FireSat example
375-376
for small satellites
86~
performance reqnirements
357
pointing requirements

(See also mapping and pointing)

363

power consumption
316,369,373,376
representative masses of
895-896
sensor selection
36S
slewing requirements
364
software sizing
663--664
spin stabilization patent
828
torque requirements
322-323
trade with orbit

accuracy

8~,1~130

weight budget
Attitude determination sensors

316,369,373

(See also Directional antennas; Horizon
sensors; Star sensors; Sun sensors;
Magnetometers; Gyroscopes;
lnernal-measuremenl units)
371-377
FireSat sensors
table of accmacy ranges

375-377
322

Australia

launch site
733
AutonoJDOns navigation
28-31
definition of
498
systems
141, l6~321,50~507
trades
500-501
AntonoJDOns orbit maintenance
511
Autonomy
FireSat payload sizing
675-{i82
future developments
890
"in moderation"
890
levels of
6l5-{i18
low-cost approach
890
software sizing
66S
trades
25,28-31
Autotracldng
625
AxIal rigidity
486
Azimuth coonliDate
100

-8Bacldoad
in a thermal system
Balkonur
launch site

454
733

BalDstic coefficlent
145
estimating
207-208
effect on satellite lifetimes
2)]
table of represeiltative values
207
Bandwidth (See also Data rate;
Communicolions architecture)
329
antenna needs
541
control of
efficient nse of
560
FireSat
289
in attitude control system
379-380
25, 652
in space vs. ground trade
inIT&C
388
281
Nyquist frequency and
regn1atory constraints
566
typical capabilities
550
550
typical GBOSat capabilities
vs. data rate
563
266
vs. energy transformation process
VS. modulation type
558-563
vs. number of satellites
867
BaseUne design
5, 247

Batt
as thermal insulation
437,438
Batteries (See also Power subsystem) 33~334
average eclipse load
422
capacity
418
capacity, ideal
422
characteristics
419,420
charge-discharge profile
418-419
depth-of-discharge
333, 420, 421
design steps
422
linear, charge-current control
427
primary batteries
409, 418-419
FireSat example
422
recharge power
315
secondary batteries
419-422
pressure vessels
420-421
specific energy density
419
thermal challenges
450-451
thermal reqnirements for
428
Beam plasma instrument
215
Beam width (See also Fooiprint;
Angular resolution)
communications subsystem
384
definition of
555
requirements for
385
Beamhopping tedmique
57~514
Beams (Strudn:r:al)
cantilevered
47~15
deflection
48~84
equivalent
470
natnral freqnencies
483,484
shear forces
474-475
Benchmark program, to evaluate
computer perfOl"llllUlCe
662~3
Bending moments
473
Bent pipe
580
TDRSSnseas
639
BER (See Bit Error Rate)

933

Index
Beta angle (Sun geometry)
example calcuIation
Beta partides
m-Ievel (dlsuete) input
telemetry data
Bieonlcal hom antenna
BIF (Built-in fnm:tion)
"Big LEO" eommunications
eonsteliations
examples of
BInary Phase Shift Keying (BPSK)

567-570
communication link
176-179,686
Delta V (velocity)
.
765
failure probability
Inside front pages
list of
81-85, 1~130
mapping and pointing
499
in navigation systems

107--109
227
398
571-572
667

power
538-539
584-585

558
(See also Modulation techniques)
Bipropellnat propulsion systems
693
advantages and disadvantages
688
applications of
694-{)96
design of
694
example systems
686
fuels nsed
713
mixture ratio
692
operating characteristics
363
use for orbit transfer
7Tl
use in integral propulsion
use on FireSat .
340
667
BIT (BnlIt-in test)
656
Bit, eomputer
560
Bit error probability
389,546,560
Bit Error Rate (BER)
389
as figure of merit
561
as function of E"tNo
555
definition of
BitDip (See also Single-event phenomeM) 220
256
Blackbody
439
heat rejection by
433,439
in thermal analysis
257
radiation temperature
Bladder
709
in propellant tanks
Blankets (See Multilayer insulation)
708
BlowdoWD pressurization system
316,725
Boosted weight
301,736
Booster adapter
545
BPS (bits per seeond)
BPSK (Binary Phase Shift Keying)
558
(See also Modulation techniques)
132, 139
Brahe, Tycho
Brayton-cyde engine (See also
409,410
Power subsystem)
BremSat (small satellite)
895-896
mass distribution of
Bremsstrahlung
231
electrons
216
X-ray dose
257,270
Brightness
270
temperature
243
Brilliant Pebbles
472-473
BrlUle substances
Bndgt;ts (See also Delta V; Mapping

and pointing;...Weight; Power;
Propelltmt; Reliability)
attitude vs. orbit

8~9O

performance

4
8~

(See also Power budget)
4,314-316
process for
creating
8~9O,1~13O,314-3l8
propellant
314,686-687,712
refining and negotiating
88-90
reliability (See also
317,765
Reliability budget)
82-83,86-88
response time example
314-318
spacecraft design
weight (See also
Weight budget) 4,315-317,724-725
667
Bnllt-in function (BIF)
667
Bnllt-in test (BIT)
204
Bulk charging
694
Bnrstdisc
Bns (See Spacecrqft bus)
83H34
Bny America Act
656
Byte

-CC (computer language)
C3 (See Command, cOnJroi.

666

and communications)
C* (characteristic exhaust velodty)
C&DH subsystem (See Command

713

and Data Handling subsystem)
Canada
633
Anik-C satellite
913
Daylight Savings Tune
8Tl
objection to military nse of ISS
830
reentry of Cosmos 954
833
sale of satellite imagery
47~75
Cantilevered beam
Capillary pumping
444-446
in heat pipes
389
Capture range, commnnlcation
735
Cargo Integration Review
555
Carrier-to-noise ratio (CIN)
Carrier-to-noise555
density-ratlo (CINo)
440-441
Cartridge heater
CASE (Computer-aided
672
software engineering) tools
83
nse in functional analysis
262
Cassegrain teleseope optics
6CJ7
Catalyst bed
TlO-Tll
CCD (dlarge-eoupled device)
CCIR (Consultative Committee on
Internationnl Radio Commnnlcations) 384

934
CCIT (CoDSUltative Committee on
interaction Telephony)
384
CDMA (See Code division multiple access)
CDR (Critical Design Review)
521,664, 880
CeIsius (unit of temperature;
See also temperature)
correct use of
439
Celestial coordinates
~97
1950 coordinates
97
2000 coordinates
97
component names
102
True of Date (TOO)
97
Celestial pole
96
Celestial sphere
95,98-110
arc (or arc segment)
99
geometry on
98-110
great circle
99
view of Earth on
115
Centaur (Orbital transfer vehicle)
characteristics of
730
Central node (See also Computer
systems, spacecraft: architectures)
653
CentraI Processing Unit (CPU)
(See Computer systems, spacecraft)
Central vs. distributed p~
(See Data delivery)
Centralized architecture,
in onboard processing
653
Centrifugal force
effect on miciogravity
206
CGN (Commen:lal Ground Network)
641
Challenger (Space Shnttle)
effect of loss on insurance
831
loss of
498
Chandra X-Ray Observatory
high performance design
248
liquid engine on
694
need to be in space
14
pointing of
43
space-referenced orbit
187
Characteristic exhanst velocity (C*)
713
Charge-conpled device (CCD) (See also
Observation payloads)
270
Charging. of spaceeraft
212-214
Check bits, in error detection
175
Chemical Release Observation
CanIster (CRO; small sate1lite)
attitude control
864
characteristics of
854
cost and performance of
858
cost estimate
874
China (See also Long Marcil)
cost estimates
802
launch sites
733
launch systems
728
user guide
743
sale of satellite imagery
833
Chirping (See Pulse compression)
Chromatic aberration
261-262
ClrcIe (conic section)
133-134

Index

Index

Circuit Tolerance Analysis
712
CircuIar velocity
135,903
C1assica1 orbit elements
(See Orbit elements)
Cleanliness requirements
522-523
Clementine (small satellite)
cost estimate for
808,874
mass breakdown
895-896
Clohessy-WDtshlre Equations
153
CMG (See Control moment gyro)
Co-elevation coordinate
100
Co-latitnde coonliDate
100
Code division multiple access
(CDMA) (See also Modulation
techniques)
576
Codes
561-563
error detecting and correcting
175
Coding
gain
562,579
types of
561
Coherent turnaround,
communication model
381-382
Cold gas propnlsion
advantages and disadvantages
693
applications of
37I,687--{j88,693
cost estimate of
799
692--{j93
operating characteristics
Pegasus attitude control
731
system weight
715
useonOGO
311
Collision avoidance
for debris avoidance
849
in constellations
198-200
Column buckling
478
Coma (aberration)
261
Combustion chamber presson;
691
Comet SSffempel-Tuttle
source of Leonid meteoroids
84i
Comet Giacoblnl-Zinner
space mission to
508
Comets
coma "name use"
261
orbit propagation for
498
source of meteoroid material
840-842
Command and Data Handling
(C&DB) subsystem
303-304, 330,

314-315,395-407
331
402
395-396
398

basic components
C&DH systems
command formats
command processing
complexity of
design of
design process table
Fm:Sat baseline
FrreSat requirements
power consumption
radiation requirement
reliability
size, weight, power estimation

404

330
399
405
404

316
403

402-403
405

331,398-407
sizing process
spacecraft bns constraints
402
400
telemetry processing
Command, Control, and
Communications (C3) (See also
12
Communications architecture)
Command decoder
396
block diagram
Commandp~

665
software sizing
635
Command Readout Station (CKS)
654
Command-response protocol
641
Commerclal Ground Network (CGN)
640--641
Commerclal ground systems
Commerclal Launch Act of 1984
8~1
1988 amendment
environmental impact
835
assessment
830-831
insurance cap
power over commercial
827
launch
824
reason for
826
requires launch license
Commerclal missions
799
cost relative to military
Commerclal o11'-the-sheif
software (see COTS)
Commerclal parts
171-172
reliability of
875
use in small spacecraft
747-748
use in spacecraft
Commerclal Space Act oU998
826
GPS spectrum
827
launch site upgnides
822
reusable launchers
Common law
822
and space policy
Communication, frequencles (See
Frequencies, communications)
Communications
227-228
effect of nuclear weapons on
663--{i64
software sizing for
Communications an:bitecture (See
also Communications subsystem;

12,21,22,
45,533-586
12, 22, 43, 553
definition
534
design process table
582-583
diversity techniques
539
double-hop link
537-538
geostationary orbit
538
geostationary orbit with crosslink
614
impact of design on operations
736
launch system and payload
538-539
low-altitude crosslinked
538
Molniya orbit
534
network components of
583-584
optical links
582
security techniques for
582
encryption and deCryption

bandwidth)

935
selection criteria
542-543
store and forward
53~537
Communications links (See also Link
budget; Communications architectures)
as part of communicationsarchitecture 543
567
budget
55D-570
design
552, 554-558
link equation
552-554
derivation
563
of Pioneer satellite
57~579
techniques for sbaring
Commimications Payload and Spaeeborne
Electronics Cost Model (CPCM) 788, 796
Communications sate11ltes
825
legal issues
631
linking of ground systems
57D-575
payload sizing
Communications subsystem
(also ca1led Telemetry and
Command Subsystem;
(See also Communications
303, 328-329,
architecture; bandwidth)

381-394,547-548
571
antenna requirements for
378,548
attributes
39D-391
block diagram of
381
canier ttacking
381
command reception
39D-391
composite signal
383
conical-scan systems
726
cost estimates
312-314,389--394
design of
388
design process table
393,399,584
equipment
710
failure mtes
382
functions
614
impact of design on operations
387
interfaces with other subsystems
394
KU-band typical parameters
392
losses
385
monopulse system
227-228
nuclear blast effects on
39D-391
operation
316
power consumption
381
phase coherence
381
ranging
711
reliability allocation to
894--896
representative masses
384,385
requirements
S-band
329
characteristics of
394
typical parameters
390
selection criteria
386
system-level interface options
381
telemetry modulation
394
typical parameters
394
X-band typical parameters
545
Compandor
Completeness, In
91
reQuirements spedfications

936

Index

Index

Component
hardware nomenclature
Component design loads
Composite materials
Composite signal
Comprehensive system test (CST)
Compression (See Data compression)
Compton scattering
Computer-aiiled software
engineering (CASE) tools
use in functional analysis
Computer language
development cost based on
memory used based on
types of, choice of
Compnter systems, spacecraft
architectures
central processing unit
(CPU)

519 .
463-464
464,465

390-391
529
226

672
83
801
666

658
645-684
651-657
656

clock speed
662
central vs. distributed
processing
23,27-28
crossing system boundaries
645-646
current technology used on
SmailSats
886-887
design drivers for
649
development process
647
FireSat example
673-683
attitude control software
673-675
6,889-890
greater reliance on
hierarchy of elements
648
integration and test
670
memory
656
performance benchmarks
662-663
reaction curves
664
representative hardware
669
requirements allocation
647, 649-660
650-651
requirements definition
resource estimation
660-670
onboard applications
665
operating-system functions
666
selection guidelines
667-070
small satellites use of
865-866
space vs. ground processing
25-27
system block diagram
655
table of (current)
669
throughput
657,662-663
Concentrator solar arrays
416
Concept development
9
requirements validation
10
Concept exploration
7,20
flow diagram
20
"Needs" analysis
9
requirements for successful
10
Concept of operations (See also
Mission concept)
21-32,69-72
Concurrent engineering
in multi-satellite
manufacturing
751,754-756,761
materials selection
747

Configuration drivers (See
Spacecrajlconjiguration)
Configuration management
521
Congress, U.s. (See also Acu ojCongress;
treaties)
commercial launch
827
GPS spectrum
826
insurance cap
831
nuclear reactor concern
825
role in FireSat
3
role in space policy
828-829
Conic section
133-134
Conical-scan systeJmI
383
Consistency
in requirements specifications
90-91
in system definition
5
Consolidated Space Operations
Center (CSOC)
637
Consolidated SatelIite Test
Center (CSTC)
637
Constants (See also individual
subjecu; e.g., SUfI; Eanh, Orbiu)
Earth and Sun
81J7-899
Earth satellite
parameters
Inside rear cover
fundamental physical,
table of
Inside front cover
high precision values of e, 1t
927
of mation
134-135
source of
893
spaceflight, table of
Inside front cover
Constellation, of satellites
active debris avoidance
849
communications
regulatory limitations
825-826
constellation maintenance
497
constellation patterns
191-196
coverage of (See also coverage) 189-11J7
190-\91
number of orbit planes
vs.latitude
197
design of
188-200
books on
197
existence of altitude plateaus
198
growth and degradation
IIJ7
194,828
patents on
process SlIIIIIIllIJ}'
11J7-200
examples of
584-585
Iridium assembly process
762-764
satellite manufacturing for
745-764
use for C(>TI!mlmications
537-539
Constraints (See Mission constrainu;
Requiremenu)
Contamination
effect on thermal surfaces
435-436
Control algorithms
for attitude determination
378
and control
Control authority
322
Control modes (See also Attitude determination
and control subsystem)
355,357,362

Control moment gyros

319,322,325,361,369
369
typical parameters
Control system (See Altitude
determination and control subsystem)
431
Conveetion
(CMGs)

Convention on International Liability
for Damage Cansed by Satellites 824,830
Convention on RegIstration of
824
Objects Launched into Space
Convention on the Prohibition of
824-825
Military or Hostile Use of Space
Coordinate systems (See also specific
95-102
coordinate systems)
IJ7
date associated with
·362
effect of coupling
geocentric-geodetic conversion 899-901
95
how to define
selection of
95
as source of error
example of importance of
105-107
correct choice
355
spacecraft
100-102
spherical
135
"sufficiently inertiar'
96
used in space missions
132
Copernicus, Nicolaus
206
CorioHs force
417
Cosine loss (solar arrays)
CosmIc rays (See also Single-event
219-221
phenomena)
275
CosmIc ray transition instrument
837
Cosmos 954
830
and damage claims
784
Cost drivers
783-818
Cost estimates
803-806
cost uncertainty
807
discount rate
810
FireSat example
799
government vs. commercial
793,801-802, 812-813
ground segment
791-792
inflation
793,802-803,812-813
launch segment
operations and maintenance 793,801-802,

813
807,809
order of magnitude
807
present value
803-806
risk assessment
2~230,237
satellite hardening
800
software
793,795-797,812-813
space segment
806-807
time distribution of costs
790-791
types of dollms
Cost EsthnatIng Relationship (CER)
792-794
categories in
815
comparison of models
787
definition of
793
data·needed for
elements of
80\-802
ground segment

937
launch segment
802-803
795-71J7
space segment
810-818
FireSat example
798-800
impact of new technology on
primary statistical indicators of
790
789-790
procedure for developing
783-820
Cost models
815
comparison of results of
791-795
paramehic
789-790
techniques for developing
803-806
Cost-risk analysis
Costs (See also Cost estimates, Cost models)
17
cost vs. design life curve
77
design-to-coSt specification
784-786
life cycle analysis
2,890-891
limitation on missions
884-886
minimize using SMAD
757
of design changes
752-753
part!process cost relationship
245-248
payload design
798
program-level allocation
65-69
reduction via COTS tools
746
spacecraft manufacturing goals
248
vs, performance (conceptual)
756-757
vs. project phase
COTS (commercial off-the-shelf) software
67
cost hierarchy
65-69
for mission analysis
68
list of tools
671,673
tailoring of
Conrler (Army COmmnnicatiODS
sateI1ite)
536
use of store and forward
Coverage (See also Earth coverage,
163-176
Constellation)
173-176
Figures' of Merit for
inappropriate statistical
173,175-176
analysis
minimum number of satellites
193-194
for whole Earth
I 89-1 IJ7
of constellations
174
Coverage Gap (FIgure of Merit)
142
CoweD's method (of orbit integration)
CPCM (Commnnications Payload and
Spaceborne Electronics
788,796
Cost Model)
656
CPU (central procfSSing unit)
564
Crane model (climate data)
CrItical Design Review (CDR) 521,664,880
182
Critical Inclination
477
CrItical loads
CrItical requirements (See also
4
Requiremenu oj a space mission)
48
hidden
48-49
identification of
48
top-level
770
CrIticality Analysis
CRO (See Chemical Release Observation
Canister)
659,672
Cross-compiler

938

Index

Crosslinks (See also Communications
architecture; Linli budget)
534-539
advantages and disadvantages
for navigation
502
list of characteristics
504
optical
583
sizing estimate
513
use for satellite navigation
506-507
Cryogenic cooling
451
Cryogens
for cryogenic cooling
451
CSOC (Consolidated SateDite
Operations Center)
637
CST (Comprehensive System Test)
529
CSTC (CODSolidated Satellite
Test Center)
637
Current
units and conversion factors
921-922
Current-voltage plot (I-V) (See also

PllOtovolraics)
Curvature (optical aberration)
Cut-ofi' frequency
Cycle time
in satellite manufacturing
Cycles of learning
in satellite manufacturing

415
261
282
746.752
759

-DD* (See Specific detectivity)

272

D-le (orbital transfer vehicle)
characteristics of
730
Dance of Planets (COTS softwure)
68
DARPA (See Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency)
Dark signal uniformity
272
Data
association as soon as possible
26
latency
25
mission vs. housekeeping
22-23
Data compression
26.550.634
Data delivery (part ofmlssion concept)
22
central vs. distributed
processing
23.27-28
level of autonomy
23
space vs. ground
23.25-27
Data dictIonary
599
Data-flow analysis. diagram
24
Data flow diagram
basis for computer
requirements
609.650.658
development of
599
rueSat example
24
in conrmuilications arcbitecture
534
use in mission design
23-26
use in navigation decision
500
Data handling (See also Computers.
spacecrcift)
632-{;35
definition of
396

observation payload
quality monitoring
unit block diagram
Data rates (See also Bandwidth)

280
634
397
279-283.
5U-548
543
544
545
549-550
287-288
545
543
544
642-643
279
545
544-545
385.549
294
384-385
547
563

analog modulation tecbniques
analog-to-digital conversion
compandor
compression
computation
definition of
digital modulation
digital-to-analog conversion
need for dumping data
observation payload
power ratio
quantization
requirements
FireSat example
1T&C
voice transmission
vs. bandwidth
Data relay (See also Communications
architecture; Crosslinks)
534
Data user Interface
626
Day numbers
914
table for finding
915
dB (decibel)
definition
554
Dead band
441-442
thermal
Dead weight fraction
(lannch systems)
723
Dead zone (of attitnde
control thrusters)
322, 325
Debris (See Orbital debris) 837-838.840-850
Decay, orbit (See Almosplleric drag;

Orbital lifetime)
DedheJ(dB)
definition
Decompression of data (See Data
compression)
Decoys (sateDite defense)
Decryption
Deep Space Network (DSN)
parameters of
tracking interplanetary
spacecraft
1T&Coptions
Defense Advanced Resean:h Projects
Agency (DARPA)
ASTP small satellite
development of new launchers
GLOMR cost experience
laser development
Defense Meteorological Satellite
Program (DMSP)
cost estimate
ground system for
mass distribution of

939

Index

554
237-238
634
548
502,596
386
854
867
874
583
808
635-636
894-896

Defense Satellite COmmunicatiODS
System (DSCS)
antenna
attitude control
bandwidth
configuration of
cost estimate
mass distribution of

TDMA
usebyAFSCN
use of upper stage
Defense SateDite Program (DSP)
attitude control
configuration of
cost estimate
mass distribution of
Delayed RadIation
Delta n (rocket engine)
Delta (lannch system)
adapters for small satellites
battery use
characteristics of
cost estimates
fundamental frequency
injection accuracy
reliability experience
sound pressure level
use of upper stage
nser's guide for
Delta pattern
(Walker constellations)

DeltaPCM
Delta V (AV = applied .
incremental velocity)
altitude maintenance
requirement
budget
deorbit requirement
table of values

572
313
550
309
808
894-896

576
534
44
44
313
310
808
894-896

231-232
694
730-731
865
409

728
802

741
742
727
742
44
743
194-195
546

314.698
176-177
176-179
157
Inside rear cover
(col. 29-32, 44-46)

DemodnJation
558
Demultiplexing
634
DensIty
units and conversion factors
921
Deorbit
l:J.V requirement
157
Department of Transportation (DOT)
826-827
launch vehicle role
Depth-of-discharge (DOD)
(See Banerles. depth-of-discharge)
253
Depth of focus
Derating, of enmponents
774
Desaturation (See also Momentum
unloading)
362
DesIgn budgets (See Budgets)
DesIgn failures
781
cause of
745-764
DesIgn for mannfacturability
DesIgn for reliability process
317
Deslgnllfe

failure probability at
767
FireSat cost trade
815-817
quantifying choice
17
reliability decisions for
768
vs. cost
815-817
DesIgn margin
75.90
reliability and .
774
DesIgn of spacecraft
(See Spacecrcift design)
DesIgn verification tests (See also
Quolijication program)
definition of
748
DesIgn to cost
77.758.783
Despun platform
359
Destructive physical analysis test
(DPA test)
522
DET (direct-energy-tnmsfer)
425
"Detect-respond" fanure analysis
606
Detectivlty (See Specific detectiviJy)
Detectors
alternative types
268-276
dwell time
268.270
elements (See Pixel)
268.270-271.281

IR
noise equivalent bandwidth
noise equivalent power
photon
silicon
thermal
visible
Developer, of a space mission
defiuition of
DevIation of the vertical
Device driver
software sizing
Devite handler (software)
Dhrystone computer benchmark
DIagnostic software
DIaphragm ,
in propellant tanks
Differential PSK (DPSK) (See also
Modulation techniques)
Diffraction (In optical system)
Disk (See also Airy disk)
Diffraction limited resolution
DIgital modnlation
(See Data rates)
DIgital signal processing (See Signal
processing. digital)
Dihedral angle (rotation angle)
Diode heat pipe
Diplexer, communication
DIrect-energy-transfer (DET;
. In power regulation)
DIrect Memory Access (DMA)
DIrect orbit
Directional antennas
DIscount rate (In cnst estimating)
in cost modeling
DJspJacement Rnence

266-275
272
272

272
270
272
267
8
899
667
667
663
667
709
560
263
263
263-265

99-100
446

389
425
670
137
322
807
807
233

Disposal
of spacecraft

31-32,45,162,849-850
debris mitigation
850
177-178
delta V budget for
deorbit delta V
157
table of
Inside rear pages (col. 44)
disposal orbit
159
200
for collision avoidance
fromGEO
162-163
32-850
need for
189,199
need for in constellations
162-163
options for
159,161
Disposal orbit
Distortion (aberration)
261
DistrIbuted architecture,
In onboard processing
653-654
DIstributed computer architecture (See also

Computers systems, spacecrqft)
653-654
DistorbllJlCe torques (See also specific
torques, e.g. Aerodynamic torques)
cyclic
equations and definitions
equations for
FITeSat worst-case estimate
in attitnde control
intemal
secular
Diversity (communications
teclmique)
DMA (DIrect Memory Access)
DMILAE (rocket engine)
DMSP (See Defense Meteorological

354
324,366
366
367
324-325
368
354
582-583
670
694

Satellite Program)
Documentation
2
reason for
of requirements
~93
of reasons for requirements
887-888
245-248
payload design
DOD (See Batteries: depth-of-discharge)
DOD-STD-

Drivers (See also System drivers)
Driving requirements (See critical

DPSK (See Differential PSK)
Drag (See Atmospheric drag)
Dralm,John
DrIft rate (In orbit)

672
521
632
89
383
275
275
539
390
303
568
382

194
152-153

4

requirements)
changed to "critical requirements"
4
Dry weight
of a spacecraft
316,725
of representative spacecraft
894-896
DSCS (See Defense Satellite
Communications System)
DSN (See Deep Space Network)
DSP (See Defense SateUite Program)
Dual Frequency Scatterometer
275
Dual mode propulsion systems
advantages and disadvantages
693
applications of
688
definition of
686
design of
688
operating characteristics
692
Ductile materials
472-473
Dutycyde
166
542-543
Duty factor
AV (See Delta V)
Dwell time
(See also Exposure time)
·166,268,573
Dynamic envelope
461
Dynamic power source
(See also Power subsystem)
409
balance of energy
409
Rankine-cycle engine
409
Stirling-cycle engine
409
Dynamic pressure
(launch systems)
722, 738
Dynamic range
as imager cbaracteristic
Dynamic test models
in satellite manufacturing

272, 284
759

-E-

(See StantJmrJslStandardization)
DOD-STD-2167
DOD-STD-480
Domsat (domestic
communications satellite)
DOORS (COTS software)
in requirements development
Doppler frequency shift
Doppler Imager
Doppler Imaging Interferometer
DOT (See Department of Transportation)
Donble-hop fink
DonbI~Pole, donble-throw switch
DoWnlink or return Unk
design procedure
signal

941

Index

Index

e (logarithm base)
accurate valne for
E-SAT (communications constellation)
example of Little LEO
use of store and forward
Early Bini (first commercial comsat)
imaging system
Earth (See also Atmosphere;

927
539
537
856
269

Space environment; Magnetic field)
angular radius of
III
table of
Inside rear cover (col. 49)
111-112,115
appearance from space
geocentric and geodetic

coordinates
geometry viewed from space
infrared energy from
oblateness of (See Oblateness)
observation parameters
formulas for

899-901
111-117
433-434

110-117

table of
physical constants
physical properties

Earth central angle
used to parameterize
coverage

maximnm

Inside rear pages
897-898
897
113

165
119,168
Inside rear pages (col. 13-16)

table of
Earth coverage (See also Swath width) 163-176
analytic approximations for
165-171
consteltations
189-197
70-72
FJreSat example
Figures of Merit
173-176
ground track as simulation
172
numerical simulations
171-173
Earth-fixed coordinates
defiDition of
96-97
names of components
102
Earth horizon sensors (See Horizon sensors)
Earth-referenced orbits
160
selection of
179-183
Earth satellite parameters,
table of
Inside rear pages
Earth station (See Ground systems)

Earth terminal (See Ground systems)
Eastern Test RaDge
732
available orbit inclination
734
location of
733
East-West stationkeeplng (See Stationkeeping)
Eccentric anomaly
139, 140
Eccentric orbits (See also orbits;

elliptical orbits; Molniya orbits)
194
continuous coverage by
182-183, 199
reasons for selecting
182
usually at critical inclination
453
thermal considerations in
135
Eccentridty (See also Orbit elements)
137.904
formulas for
183
selection of
136
Eccentridty vector
904
formula for
Eclipses
105-107
computation of duration
effect on power
339,413,420-422
effect on thermal input
110
table of duration
Inside rear cover
(col. 53)
360
thermal shock from
105-106
EcHptic
898
rate of change of the obliqnity
EcHptic coordinates
96
definition of
102
names of components
EDAC (See Error Detection and Correction)
Edge (COTS software)
68-69
Effective emittance
437-438
(See also Emittance)
119
Effective ·horlzon
Effective isotropic radiated power
41,384
(EIRP; See also Link budget)

communications requirements
in ground system design process
in link eqnation
Effective area, antenna
Effective thrust

385
621
551
553
691

EmP (See Effective isotropic radiated power)
ElastIcIty, methods for analyzing
ElectrIc charge
units and conversion factors
ElectrIc conductance
units and conversion factors
Electric field Intensity
units and conversion factors
Electric potential difference
units and conversion factors

471-474

921
921
922
922

701-708
693
advantages and disadvantages
702-708
alternative designs
688
applications of
692-693,
operating characteristics
703-704,707
687
types of
Electrical power subsystem (EPS)

ElectrIc propulsion

(See Power subsystem)
Electromagnetic compatibDity (EMC)
Electromagnetic Interference (EMI)
Electromagnetic pulse (EMP)
hardening against
Electromagnetic radiation

524
213
224

atmospheric transmission
definition of spectral bands
(See also RF)
Electromagnetic spectrum

258

234

255
255-257

266
infrared systems
266
microwave radiometers
257
primary (direct)
266
radar systems
257
secondary (single scatter)
266
visible systems
926
Electromagnetic units
Electromechanical assembly
523
cleanliness reqnirement
234
Electronic Intelligence (ELINT)
Electrons
from nuclear explosion
223-226
effects on communications
227-228
in space environment
214-216
sbielding against
230-232
Elements of a mission (See Mission elements)
Elevation (In az..eJ coordinate
100-102
system)
Elevation angle (or grazing angle)
(See also Swath width)
113,117,264
FireSat example
287, 293
importance of in mission
design
116-117,126-128
Ellipse (conic section)
133-134
EDipso (communications constellation)
example of LEO cellular
538
parameters of
585

942

Index

Ellipticity of the Earth (See
Oblateness 0/ the Eartll)

Equivalent axial loads

Embedded computer
EMC (See Electromagnetic compaJibility)
EMI (See Electromagnetic interference)
Emissivity

in Stefan-BoJtzmann equation
IR
table ofvalnes

Errorbud~(SeeBudgeu)

648

Error correetiDg codes
569
Error Detection and Correction (EDAC)
circuitry for
660-661
coding tecbniques for
775
ESA (See European Space Agency)
Escape velodty (See also Orbits)
135

435-436
439
435
436

Emittanc:e (See Emissivity)
EMP (See Electromagnetic pulse)
EncodIng
634
Encryption
582, 634
End-of-Ilfe (See Disposal ofspacecraft)
End nser, of a space mission
definition of
7
location of
25
Energy

units and conversion factors
Energy balance eqnation

922
452-457
453-456
134

for sizing therma1 radiator
Energy equation (orbits)
Energy conversion efficiency
(of a solar cell)
413
Energy storage subsystem (See also Batteries)
design steps
422
Engineering data
configuration management
521
definition and control of
521
Engineering development models
in satellite manufacturing
760
Engines, rockct (See Rocket engines)
Environment (See also Space environment;
Nuclear weapons environment)
203-229
Environmental coneerns (See also
Orbital debris; Space environment)
lasers and particle beams
836
mission design and
834-838
need for environmenta1
assessment
833
nuclear power sonrees and
825.836
orbital debris
840-850
European policy
838
US policy
838
Enviromnental Control System
(See Tllermoi subsystem)
Ephemeris
definition of
131
propagation
software sizing
665
real time
501
satellite
497-498
solar

EPS (Electrical Power Subsystem)
(See Power subsystem)
Equator (of coordinate system)
EquDaterai right triangle
Equinolt(See Vernal equinox)
EqnIpotentlal surface
for the Earth

478-499.488

897
524

formulas for
903
ESOC (European Space oPerations
Center}
592
ETA (Explosive Transfer Assembly)
700
ETR (See Eastern Test Range)
Euler angles
380
Euler budding loads
477-478
Enropean Space Agency (ESA)
(See also Ariane)
environmental models from
844

L-Sat operator

633

launch vehicle costs
803
requirements definition
76
upper stages
730
European Space Operations Center
(ESOC)
592
Enropean Space Tracldng network
ground-support scheduling
569
EUTELSAT (Enropean Telecommunication
SateIlite Consortium)
384
Event-drlven software arcbitectnre
656
EWB (COTS software)
68
Excel (COTS software)
in requirements developmen1
89
Julian date in
916-9]7
Exbanst plume
715
Exbanst velodty, effective
689
EXOS (Small spaceeraft)
characteristics of
769-770
Exospheric: temperature
208
Expander eyde
696
Expected launcll avallabDity
726
Exploitation of space
14
Explorer VI (small satellite)
configuration of
309
Explorers (NASA spac:ecraft)
853
Explosive Transfer Assembly (ETA)
700
Export Administration Act of 197'
834
Export restrictions (See Import and
export restrictions)
Exposure time (See also DweU time)
166
External distnrbanc:es (See Disturbance
torques)
Extreme mtraviolet Telescope
276

497-498
101
103-104
899

943

Index

-FF-number (See also Infinity F-number)
computation of. for FrreSat
F-stop

259
289
259

204
F10.7 index of solar radio flux
465.482-483
Face sheets
523
Fadlity cleanllness requirements
Facility elements
624
ground system
FAI (communications constellation)
539
example of Little LEO
537
use of store and forward
Failure Modes, Effects, and
338.770
Critic:ality Analysis (FMECA)
}'ai!ures (See also Reliability)
510
altitude vs. orbit control
845-850
caused by debris
403
computer watchdog
876-878
cost of
70
hypothetical calcn1ation
317
evaluation of modes
765-766
failure probability
773
fault tree for
610
GaliJeo antenna
implications for low-cost
spacecraft design
860.862
implications for orbit transfer
186
options
606
implications for spacecraft options
implications for structural design 467-471
465
in composite materials
727
in launch vehicles
660
in spacecraft CllIDputer
726
launch delay after
338-339
lifetime and reliability
770
modes I!DBIYsis
547
need for telemetry
772
rates for piece parts
770-771
reporting of
Fairings
launch vehicle
306.311.725,
727.735-738
Fatigue (structural)
Fault avoidance
reliability and
Fault detection
fault tolerance
inIT&C
related to autonomy
software methods for
software sizing for
Fault tolerance
Fault tree
for software reliability
FCC (See Federal C011l11lU1UCations
Commission)
FDMA (See Frequency division
multiple access)
FeasibDity assessment
FED STD 209 (See Facility
cleanliness requirements)
Federal Communications
Commission (FCC)
proposals to

466

773-779
700
771
383
664
659-660
664-665
m-779

772-773

51-52

580

role in allocating orbital slots
and frequencies
566.826
Federal Tort Claims Act
830
Federated architecture (onboard
653
processing)
Fce
789
in cost models
829
''Fenced fundIng"
Field of view of spac:ec:raft (See also
116
.Access area; Footprint)
130
in pointing requirements
163
instantaneous
FIgures of Merit (FoMs)
characteristic exhaust velocity
691
59
characteristics of good
173-176
coverage
197
in constellation design
767
Mean Mission Duration
765
reliability
690
thrust coefficient
632,641
FIle Transfer Protoeol (FTP)
FInal Operating Capability (FOC)
786
470
Finite element model
FIreSat Example MJssion
342
ADCS design process
673-675
AOCS software for
57
altitude trade
667-670
attitude control software
attitude determination and
376
control system selection
attitude determination sensor
375
selection
675-682
autonomous fire detection
422
battery capacity
404-405
C&DH subsystem
communication parameters
576
for payload
543
communications architecture
computer system
679-682
architecture selection
380
control algorithms
364
control system selection
793,810-818
cost estimates
682-683
software
814-815
cost uncertainty
71
coverage data
49
critical requirements
548
data collection rate
24
data-flow diagram
178
Delta V budget
815-817
design life cost trade
130
fields of view
59-61
fire warning time as MoE
functional flow of geopositioning
req~meut

imaging needs
legal and policy issues
link budgets for
mapping accnrac:y
Measures of Effectiveness

82
876
838-839
567
295
59-60

944

Index

miniature satellite technology
869-871
approach
mission element alternatives
34
mission objectives
12-15
mission options
21-32
mission requirements
15-18
mission statement
3
onboard data processing
549
orbit choices
184-185,293-294
origin of
2-3
payload design
291-296
aperture
294
data rate
294
frequency bands
295
resolution
294
software sizing
675-682
sllJlllDllI)' of
297
swath width
293-294
perlimnance drivers
38
performance parameters
60
preliminary concepts
36
spacecraft parameters
339-341
software cost estimates
632-635
software sizing
673-683
subject of
252-254
system algorithms for
58
te1emetty, tracking, and command
548
thruster sizing
372
time disttibution of costs
814
trade tree
tJ'lInsfer orbit for
weight budget
Work Breakdown Structure

Firmware

36
187
341
811-812
658

.First Point of Aries (See Vernal equinox)
Flattening factor (Earth shape)
897, 900
FleetSat Experimental Package
580
Flexible Image Transport System

use on NASA missions
Flexibility (in structural members)
FlIght FeasibDity Review (FFR)
FlIght path angle

formulas for
FlIght vehicle mass
Flow down (See ReqUirements of
a space mission, allocation)
definition of
FLTSATCOM (collllllWlications
satellite)

antenna size
attitude control subsystem
communications and C&DH
systems
initial design decisions
mass disttibution of
mission parameters
modulation technique
power budget
power sUbsystem
propellant budget

595
470
735

133
902
723
5
339-351
572
34&-347
347-348
343
894-896
342-351

560
345
349
344

Index
propulsion subsystem
requirements and constraints
size and design integration
structures subsystem
weight budget

346
343
351
350-351
345
211,221,217-219
221
177-178,184,187

Flnence
Flux
Flybys
FMEA (See Failure Modes & Effects Analysis)
FMECA (See Failure Modes, Effects,
and Criticality Analysis)

Foam
as thermal insulation
437, 438
FOC (See Final Operating Capability)
Focal length

computation of, for FireSat
Focal point
Focal-plane arcbitecture
FoM (See Figures of Merit)

258-259
288
258
263-265

Footprint
163,165-166
average overlap
166
size computations
165-167
Foree
units and conversion factors
922
Forcing functioIlS
462
Foreshortening near geometric
horizon
114-116
Fortran (computer language)
663
Forward error correction coding
561
Forward llnk (See also

Communication links)
alterriate definitions of
FOV (See Field of view of spacecraft;
Footprint)
France (See also AriJzne)
hybrid sounding rocket
launch vehicle characteristics
launch vehicle user guide
sale of imagery data
small satellites
Fracture control program
Fracture-mechanks safe-life
analysis
Fragmentation weapoIlS
Frame image
Free-body diagram

Free fall (See Microgravity)
Free molecular heating
Freja (small sate1lite)
cost estimate
mass distribution of
Frequency
cut-off
Nyquist
spatial
Frequency bands
. allocation of
for FireSat Example Mission
limitations on flux densities
RFcarrier

selection of
sharing
FreqUency division multiple

328,565-566
566

access (FDMA)
Frequency hopping (coDllllllllicatioIlS
technique)
Frequency response, laundl vehicle
FreqUency shift keying (FSK)

576

582
740

(See also Modulation

393,559-560

~~s)

Frozen orbit
180,182-183
FSK (See Frequency Shift Keying)
632. 641
409

FTP (FIle TraDSfer Protocol)

Fuelce1ls
regenerative
Fuel mass fraction (See Propellant
mass fraction)
Functional flow diagram
Functklnal partitioning (See also
Computer systems, spacecraft:
requirements definition)
Functklnal redundancy
Functional testing of spacecraft
Future changes in space

411

82-83

Future space programs
boob on

889
889-891

trends

701
728
743
833
855
469

469

222
260
721
433
808
895-896
255
282
281
281
826

282
566

542

255

from nuclear expiosions
222-224, 226
230
shielding against
GAS (See Get-Away Special)
Gas jets (See Attitude control
actuators; Thrusters)
Gauss's Formnla (spherical
. geometry)
Gaussian statistics
how to treat in cost modeling
805
inappropriate for cover
173,175-176
inappropriate for cost modeling
804
math model for
805
GCI (See Geocentric Inertial
Coordinates)
GCR (see Galactic cosmic rays)
GemIni
cost estimate
General perturbationS (See also

808
142

GEO (See Geosynchronous orbit)
Geocentric coordinates

traDSformation to geodetic
901
Geocentric Inertial Coordinates (GCI)
96
in defining orbital elements
135-136
inertial properties of
135
Geodetic coordinates
899-901
Geolocation
250
GeomagnetIcally trapped radiation

(See Trapped radiation)
Geomagnetism (See Magnetic field)
Geometrical horizon (See also Horizon)

303

535

Gamma rays

Orbits; Orbit perturbations)
651'-652
779
528

5-7,889-891

missiOIlS

945

-Gg (unit of aeceleration)
glevels
in launch vehicles

920

739-740
G&C (Guldance and control)
(See Guidance and Navigation System;
Attitude Determination and Control

Subsystem)
Gff (See Gain-ta-noise temperature ratio)
Gain
552-554
in antennas
Gain-to-nolse temperature ratios
623
(Gil) (See also link budgets)
385
requirements for
218-221
Galactic cosmic rays (GCR)
GalHeo (interplanetary mission)

complex operations of
response to in-flight failure
Gallinm arsenide (GaAs)
in photovoltaics
GALS (RussIan spacecraft)
use of electtic propulsion

595
610
413,414,415

Gamma ray burst insb ument
Gamma Ray Observatory (GRO)

cost estimate
monopropellant-hydrazine
system
radiation overload

687
275

808
697'-698
837

119
Geometry
95-130
books on
98
on the celestial sphere
98-110
thermal factors
907-912
Geometry, spherical (See Spherical
geometry)
143
Geopotentlal model
GEOSAT (Earth mapping satelUte)
314
attitude control
311
configuration of
629-630
ground system
Geosynchronous orbit (GEO) (See
also Stationkeeping; Geosynchronous
transfer orbits)
825-826
allocation of slots
121-123
apparent satellite motion in
180
applications of
537-538
communications architecture
843-844
debris in
549
Earth coverage from
182
FireSat us of
642
ground station coverage
728
launch vehicle capacity to
Inside
numerical parameters
rear pages
138
period of satellites
761
probability of collisions in
216
radiation dose rate in

946
stationkeeping
497,508-510
thermal considerations in
452-453
Geosynchronous transfer orbit (GTO)
cost to
802
debris in
845
grollDd control of
30
injection accuracy
742
IallDcb vehicle capacity to
728
plane cbmige in
185
Genmmimn lens
267
Get A way Special (GAS)
859
Glacobinl-Zlnner (comet mission)
508
GINGA (Japanese X-ray satellite)
837
"Global commons"
concept applied to outer space
835
Global Navigation Satellite System
(GWNASS, RussIa)
506
Global Positioning System (Gps)
advantages and disadvantages
for navigation
502
applications of
243
as lime source
582
Block II cost estimate
808
for orbit determination
140-141
in orbit vs. attitude trade
83
list of characteristics
504
mass distribution of
894-895
modulation technique
579
protection of frequency
826
sizing estimate
513
subject of
251
use for attitude determination
505
use for satellite uavigation
321.505
visibility requirement
193
G10balstar (communications consteDatlon)
coding for
545
communications bandwidth
550
effect of nuclear bmst
222
example of LEO cellular
538
fIXed beams
573
parameters of
585
useofCDMA
579
use of RAD-6000
669
use of "sate1lite diversity"
582
GWMR (Global Low Orbiting
Message Relay) satellite
857
cost estimate
874
guidance and control
864
GWNASS (Russian Navigation
System) (See Global Navigation

Satellite System)
GMT (Greenwich Mean Time;

See Universal Time)
GN&C (See Guidance and navigation system)
GNS (Ground Network System)
641
Goddard Earth model
143
Goddard Range and Range Rate
system
547
Goddard TraJectory DetermInation
System (GTDS)
501,503

Index
GOES (Geostationary Operational
- 548
EnvirollDl19ltal Satellite)
antenna size
574
cost estimate
808
data rates
548
Gold
thermal properties of
436
GONAS (Russian spacecraft)
use of electric propulsion
687
GPS (See Global Positioning System)
Gnt£eful degradation
in constellation
163,190-191,199
design
Grannlarity
401
Gravity assist trajectory (See Flybys)
Gravity gradient
control technique
359-360,364
use on small satellites
863-864
forces in microgravity
205
torque computation
324,366
FireSat example
367
Gravity gradiometer
275
Grazing angle (See Elevation ang/f!)
Great cln:le
99
Great cln:le an:
99
Greenwich Mean Time (GMT;
See Universal Tune)
Greenwich meridian
908
in Earth-fixed coordinates
96-97
GRO (See Gomrna Ray Observatory)
Ground Network System (GNS)
641
Ground sample distance (GSD)
276
Ground segment (See Ground systems)
Ground-8pace TracldDg and Data Network
(GSTDN)
as communications relay
element
43
tumarollDd ratio
381
Ground-station tracking
503
Ground systems
12.621-644
basic elements
624-629
commercial
640-641
communication links
631-632
cost estimating relationship
SOl
coverage per spacecraft
642-643
117-123
computations for
summary offormulas
121
data rates and storage
642-643
data user requirements
643-644
dedicated
623
a1teruatives to
636-641
design process
623-624
functions and options
table of
622
GEOSAT example
629
host .
636
impact on design on operations
614
interface
305
mission and facility elements
624
orbit control by
510

T

Index
role in orbit
498,501,503
determination
636-(;39
service-provided
628
typical instaIlation
GnnmtI terminal (See Ground systems)
GnnmtI trace (See Ground tracks)
GnnmtI tracks
116
definition of
137-139
evaluation
294
FireSat example
155-156
repeating
137-139
satellite
171-173
uSe in coverage analysis
Ground-truth ca1lbration
266
measurements
GSD (see Ground satnp/f! distance)

GSTDN (See Ground Space Tracking

and Data Network)
GTDS (See Goddard Trajecrory

Determination System)
Guida:nce (See also Navigation)
497
definition of
Guida:nce and navigation
321.497-514
subsystem
499
design process table
512-514
hardware sizing
501
requirements definition
512
sizing
498-501
system definition process
GVSC (onboard computer)
669
characteristics of
Gyration (See Radius of gyration)
Gyroscopes (See also Inertial
322, 375
measurement units)
66S
software sizing
354
Gyroscopic stiffness

-B732
H-2 launch system
728
characteristics of
727
reliability experience
743
user's guide for
H-I0 (orbital transfer vehicle)
730
characteristics of
823
Hague, International Court at the
Han Effect thrusters (See Electric prupulsion)
221-236
Hardening of spacecraft
341-351
HEAO-B design example
346-347
attitude control subsystem
communications and C&DH
348
systems
~345
initial design decisions
342
mission parameters
345
power budget
349
power subsystem
346
propulsion subsystem
343
requirements and.constraints

947
size and design integration
structures subsystem
weight bndget

351
351
345

Heat balance
calcnlation of
452-457
Heat pipes
412-413,444-446
Heat transfer (See Heat balance)
440-442
Heaters
Heel, offootprint (See also Footprint)
166
Helix anteDna (See alsoAntenTllLS)
571
Heritage, tedmical (cost factor)
798-799
IIETE (small sate1lite)
874
cost estimate
895-896
mass distribution of
12, 15
mdden agenda
245
in payload performance
37
mdden drivers
48
mdden requirements
HIgh Energy Astronomical
Observatory (See HEAO)
658
HIgher-order languages (ROL)
153
HiD's equations
859.865
IIitchbiker (Small satellite \annch
146-150. 185
Hohmann transfer orbit
185
advantages of
as most efficient
146
.two-burn transfer
147
total required delta V
146
Hohmann, Walter
HOL (See Higher-order languages)
831
Hold Harmless Clanse
463
Homogeneous metals
479
Hoop radius of curvature
Horizon
119
effective
114-116
foresbortening near
117
inner/outer
113
ttue (geometric)
Horizon crossing indicators (See also
374
Horizon sensors)
322. 373-374
Horizon sensors
375-376
FireSat example
66S
software sizing for
571
Hom antenna
672
Host machine (computer)
Hot-gas system (See Propulsion system;

Thrusters)
"Honse of quality"
Housekeeping
data definition
data handling
HS 601 (rocket eugine)
Bnbble Space Telescope (HST;

See Space Telescope)
Bnbble Star Catalog
(COTS Software)
Hybrid architecture
Hybrid rockets
advantages and disadvantages
applications of

78-80
23
330
694
234
68
612
693
687-688

i-

Index

948
design of
example systems
operating characteristics
Hydrazlne propeDant (Nz~
advantages and disadvantages
chamcteristics
cost estimate of
in bipropellant engines
in dual-mode systems
in monopropellant engines
thermal requirements for
use in launch vehicles
use in thrusters
use on FLTSATCOM
use on HEAO-B
Hyperbola (coDie sedion)
Hyperspectral sensor systems
Hypervelodty debris Impact
(See also Orbital debris)
effect on satellite of

699-70]
701
692
693
692
797
694-6%
688
697-698
428
731-732
711
343-346
346
133-134
276
846

-1VO (Input/Output)
VOhandler
I·V (See Current-voltage plot)
ICBM (Intercontinental
BaI&tlc MJssjJe)
ICD (Interface Control Document)
leo (colDIIDIDications constellation)
example ofMED system
parameters of
suit with TRW
IEEE Spedficatlon Gnide
(software standards)

607

666

237
92
539
585
830
670

IIlnminance

units and conversion factors
922
Import and export restrictions
effects on mission design
833-834
IMU (See Inertial-measurement unit)
inclination (See also Orbit elemenJs)
definition of
136
fomtulas for
902
prograde vs. retrogade
137
india
launch sites
733
sale of satellite imagery
833
small satellites
854-855
indiction (15 year period)
9]4
Indium phosphide (in
photovoltalcs)
413.4]5
Indostar (small satellite)
cost estimate
874
Industrial Space FacDity (ISF)
829
inertia matrix
354
Jnertial..measurement unit (IMU)
322, 375
software sizing
665
Jnertial space
%.140.153

949

Index

JnertiaI Upper Stage (IDS) (See

also Space Shuttle)
characteristics of
injection accuracy
user's guide for
Infinity F-number (F.stop, F No.)
computation of. for FireSat
Intlatlon
in cost modeling
Infrared (See Detectors. IR)
Infrared emissivity (See Emissivity)
Infrared radiation
from the Earth

712, 73]
730
7]2
744
259
289
79]-792

255-257.433-434
434

from the planets
Infrared (IR) remote-sensing
systems

255.266-267
45]

need for cooling
initial Operating CapabDity
(l0C)
784.794
initiation (See Program initiation)
Injected weight
3]6.725
Injection orbit
159
INMARSAT (international Maritime
Satellite)
384
Inner horizon (See also Horizon)
117.167
Inpnt/Output (VO)
656
Instantaneous Access Area (IAA)
(See also Access Area)
164
Instantaneous area coverage rate
(See also Area coverage rate)
166
Instantaneons coverage area
(See Footprint area; Field ofview;
Access area)
Jnstroctlon mix
662
Jnstroctlon Set Architeetnre (lSA)
(See also Computer systems.
spacecraft: cenrral processing unit)
658
Insulation
436-438
Insurance coverage
830-834
actuarial risk
832
contracting for
832
foreign launches
751
launch failures and
831
loss to government equipment
830
loss to others on flight
831
on-orbit performance
832
pre-launch
830
reflight
83]
third-party liability
830-831
Integral propulsion
as key system trade
44
as upper stage option
34.727
cost impact of
183.685-686
engines for
694
for FireSat
36
use of
685-686
Integrated Prodnet Team (IPT)
74
Integrated System Test (1ST)
529-530
Intelleetnal property rights (See Patents)
InteJsat

antenna
C-band margin
consortium
cost estimate
mass distribution of
operations approach
ranging tones
relay bandwidth
representative satellites
TDMA

n&C parameters
Interagency Nuclear Safety
Review Panel
Intercontinental ballistic missile
(ICBM)
Interdepartmental Radio Advisory
Committee
Interface Control Document (lCD)
Interface Requirements
Specification (IRS)
Interference (See Jamming)
Inter]eaving of data
international Astronomical Union
modified Julian date
setting astrophysical constants
International Court at the Hague
international Frequency
Registration Board

571.572
569
384
808
894-895
43
547
550
633
576
548

836
237

566
92
661
582
918
893
823
384.826

822-828
international space law
825
conflicts with U.S. law
International Space Station
849
active debris avoidance
831
commercial opportunities
77
design requirements
763
orbital debris considerations
829
political conflict
827
potential SDI role
423
power distribution
828
relevance to patents
retrieval of satellites
]63
use for
919-926
International System of Units (SI)
International Telecommunication
826
Convention and FInal Protocol
International Telecommunications
Union(lTU)
82]
Apstar regulatory problem
826
control of GEO
581
data relay proposals
565-566
frequencies allowed by
385
impact on n&C
384
organization of
826
regulatory approacb
International Traffic in Arms
834
Regulations (lTAR)
Internet (See also Wideband data systems)
550
data rates
566
RF frequencies allowed
581
satellite systems for

535.539
use of satellites for
632, 64]
Internet Protocols (IP)
Interplanetary orbits
89]
human missions
29
need for autonomy
]87
payload increase
411
power systems for
136
reference frame for
808
representative spacecraft
68.6]0
software for
502
spacecraft tracking
453
thermal considerations in
784
IOC (Initial Operating CapabDity)
275
Ion mass spectrometer
Ion PropuJsion (See Electric propulsion)
632, 641
IP (Internet Protocols)
74
IPT (Integrated product team)
IR (See Infrared)
IR emissivity (See Emissivity)
43
IRAS (Infrared Astronomy Satellite)
Iridium (communications constellation)
222
effect of nuclear burst
54
example of innovative system
538
example of LEO cellular
573
multiple beams
193
origin of name
891
rapid deployment
762-764
satellite assembly process
Iridium (element)
697
use of. in thrusters
IRS (Interface Requirements
618
Specification)
614
ISA (Jnstroctlon Set Arch:iteeture)
508
ISEE-C (spacecraft)
ISES/REX (small satellite)
854
characteristics of
748
ISF (Industrial Space FacDity)
ISO 9000
67]
software standards
90
ISO-I5288 (standard)
464
Isotropic metals
fsp (See Specific impulse)
IsraeIl Launch Complex
733
location of
ISS (See lnJemational Space Station)
1ST (See Integrated System Test)
ltamsat (small satellite)
855
characteristics of
ITU (See International
Telecommunications Union)
699
IUS SRM·2 (motor)
IUS (See Inertial Upper Stage)

-JJacchla models (atmosphere)
Jamming (of RF signals)

antijam techniques

208
236.580-582

950

Index

Index

atmosphere blocking
phased army use to avoid
susceptibility to
vs. data rate
Japau (See also B-1, B-2)
commercial remote sensing
communications satellites
launch sites
launch systems
launch vehicle costs
sale of satellite imagery
small satellites
time zone
use of electric propulsion
U.S. export control
Jet Propulsion Laboratory
Deep Space Network
Jingnan Iannch site (ChIna)
location of
Jovial (computer language)
JPL (See Jel Propulsion Laboratory)
Juliau Century
Juliau Dates
conversion to calendar dates
table for finding
Jupiter
thermal environment
"Just In time" manufacturing

564

572
537-538
550
833
633
733
728,732
802
833

856,858
909

706-707
836

502

Kilogram
definition of
919
KIPS (thousands of instructions
per second)
662
Kitsat (small satellite)
cbaracteristics of
8S4-855
Kosmos (small satellite)·
characteristics of
854
Kourou Launch Center
location of
733
Ku-band oommuniadions
cbaracteristics of
395
cost estimate of
801
fumreplaDsfor
641
on Intelsat-V
550
onTDRS
386,393,639

733
666

-L-

920
913-918
914-917
915

1.-9 (orbital transfer vehicle)

434
753-755

-KK (Kelvin, unit of temperature)
439
K (notation for 1,000 BDd 1,024)
665
Kagoshhrui Space Center
location of
733
Kalmanffiter
software sizing
665
Kapton
thermal properties of
436
KapustIn Yar (Iannch site)
location of
733
Keel fittings (on Space Shuttle)
336
Kelvin (unit of temperature;
See also temperature)
correct use of
439
Kennedy Space Center
(See Eastem Range)
732
Kepleriau (= dasskal orbit) elements
(See Orbit elements)
135-136
Keplerlan orbits (See also Orbits;
Two-body equations ofmotion)
132-140
Kepler, Johannes
laws of planetary motion
132, 139
Kevlar™
464
Khornerstone computer benchmark
663
Klc:kmotor
306
cost estimates
796
Klc:kstage
301

characteristics of
730
L-Sat (communiadions satellite)
633
L-SheU (magnetie field)
215
Lagrange, Joseph
188
Lagrange point orbits
160.184.188
Lagrange points

space colonies at
Land Remote-Senslng
Commerdalization Act of 1984
Landmark tracking
advantages and disadvantages
for navigation
list of characteristics
sizing estimate
use for satellite navigation
Landsat 4, 5 (Earth observation satellite)
confignration of
Language (See computer language)

188
52
833
502
504
513
507
310

Lasers
as communications link
583-584
as cost risk
803
as weapons
228-229
in gyros
375
legal aspects of
836
susceptibility of power systems to
410
thermal challenges
451
vs. RF crosslinks
583
LatchIng valves
698
Latency of data
25
Lateral rigidity
486
Launch azimnth
153
Launch rate
726
Launch segment (See Launch systems)
Launch sites
732-734

map of
selection process
weather considerations
streamlined spacecraft testing

733
734
749-750

733
table of locations
530--531
test operations at
LaunCh systems (See also
individU11l1aunch vehicles) 44-45,719-744
aerodynamic drag forces
721.77:2
724-726
availability
736
booster-adapters
ceDter-()f-gravity
721
721
center-of-pressure
305
constraints on spacecraft design
802
cost estimates
724
cost, in selection process
723
dedicated vs. shared
719
definition
77:2
dynamic pressure .
721
flight path angle
721
forces actiog on
690
gravity and drag losses for
impact on structural
460
requirements
742
injection accuracy
830--832
insurance coverage for
735-738
interfaces with payload
530
launch site operations
723
mass fractions
723
multiple payload capabilities
navigation, guidance, and
724
control sUbsystem use
738-743
payload environments
735-738
payload fairings
725
in selection process
735
payload integration
724,725
performance capability
performance for
729
due-East launches
729
polar launches
719
performance improvement
77:2
performance losses
724
performance margin
409
power sources
726.727
reliability
724
requirement allocation
720,723-734
selection process
739
separation from spacecraft
724
spacecraft compatibility
726
stand-down time
736
stnictural and electrical interfaces
726
surge-rate capacity
77:2
thrust-to-weight ratio
730
upper stages
743-744
user guides, listing of
velocity as a measure of
720
performance
725
weight parameter definitiOJis
153-157
Launch windows
822~28
Law, International space
907
Law of Cosines for Angles
907
Law of Cosines for Sides
907
Law of Sines
LDEF (See Long Duration Exposure Facility)

951
Lean manufacturing
Lean prodndIon

754-755

for multi-satellite manufacturing 748-749
LearnIng curve

LEASAT (communications satellite)

809-810
633

Length

units and conversion factors
922-923
Lens (refractive optical system)
258
Lens antenna
572-573
LEO (See Low-Earth orbit)
LEo.:l (communiadions constellation)
example of Uttle LEO
parameters of
use of store and forward
LeoDid meteors

LIability
and damage claims
use of space and
Llbration
Llbration point orbits
Life cycle (See also Costs, life cycle)
Life Sdence Lab Module
Lifetime (See also Design Ufe; Mean
mission duration; Orbital lifetime)
design cost trade
determining requirements
effect of nuclear burst
failure probability
reliability models

539
584
537
842
829-832
830
829
360

188
7
275
815-817
17-18

m

771-772
766

LIft

on launch vehicles
"Lights-out operations"
LIghtSats (See also Miniature

721
617

853-882
Satellites)
annotated bibliography
881~82
162
for constellations
6
greater use of
growth in numbers
890
survivability strategy, use in
236
275
Limb scanning radiometer
468
Limltload
Linear, cbarge-current-control (See
427
also Batteries)
220
Linear energy transfer
Unes of code (See SOUTce lines of code)
Link (See CommunicaJions links)
543
Link access time
543
Link availability

Linpack computer benchmark
Uquid propulsion systems

567-568
623
231,550--570
551
551
552-554
663
639

"Little LEO" communiadiODS
constellations
examples of
Load factors

538-539
584-585
335,461

Link budget
Link data rates
Link design

process table for
Link equation

derivation of

952
Loaded weight
of representative spacecraft
LoadsIloadiog (mechanical)

316,725
894-895

buckling
477
column buckling
477-478
coupled loads analysis
462
crippling
470
critical loads
477
design limit load
467
design ultimate load
471
equivalent axial loads
478-479
in mission planning
606
Local sidereal time (LST)
154
Local tangent coordinates
96
Local vertical (on the Earth)
899
Local VerticaJ/Loeal Horizontal
(LVLH) coordinates
definition of
96
names of components
102
Logisties,space
45
Long Duration Exposure FacIHty (LDEF)
Ballistic coefficient
243
results from
841
Long MardJ launch system
732
characteristics of
728
fundamental frequency
74i
reliability experience
727
user's guide for
743
LongItude of perigee
136
Look point
123
Lorentz acceleration
701
LOSAT·X (small spacecraft)
characteristics of
854
Losse;

in communications link (See
also Unk budget)
in data compression
Louvers (thermal control)
Low-eost satellites (See also

Miniature satellites; LightSats)
annotated bibliography
design considerations
Low·Earth orbit (See also Orbits;
Cwerage; Space environment)
apparent motion as seen
from ground
communications constellations
(See also constellations)
defined by radiation belt
examples of
FireSat example
fannulas for visibility
ground station coverage
ground track plot
sample thermal calculation
thermal considerations in
Low·thrust orbit transfer
advantages of
LST (see Local Sidereal Tune)
Luminance

T

Index

554-558
26
442-444
853-882
881-882
858-863

117-123
538-539
182
584--585
182-183
121
542
171
455
452
186

I

units and conversion factors
923
Lunar Economic Development Authority 840
LVLH (see Local VerticallLocal

Horizontal, also Local Tangent
coordinates)
Lyman.Alpha Coronograph

275

-MM-3SD IanndJ system
characteristics of
MageI1an spacecraft
structures subsystem
Magnetic dipole moment

732
770
483-485
926

units and conversion factors
923
Magnetic field strength
926
units and conversion factors
923
Magnetic field (Earth)
212-216,360
L-shell
215
magnetotail
212
substonns
213
trapped radiation
224
Magnetic flux
units and conversion factors
923
Magnetic induction
926
units and conversion factors
923
Magnetic moment
926
units and conversion factors
923
Magnetic stabDization
use on small satellites
864-868
Magnetic torquers
application range
365
characteristics of
369
rueSat example
376
on small spacecraft
863
sizing
370
Magnetometers
322,373,374
rueSat example
375-376
software sizing
665
Magnetoplasmadynamic thrnsters
(MID; See Electric
propulsion)
692-<;93,701
MagnIfication of a lens
259
Major program, in DoD usage
9
Management re;erve
in mission costing
803
Manned Maneuvering Unit

693

MANS (See Microcosm Autonomous
Navigation System)
Manufaetnrabllity
spacecraft design for
ManufacturiDg in space
potential for
use of microgravity for
ManufaetnrIng of spacecraft
acceptance tests
configuration identification
creating visions and goals

745-764
244
206

519-523
520
521
750-751

953

Index
design for manufacturability
745-764
523-524
inspection
Iridium assembly process
762-764
qualification tests
520
qualified design
520
quality assmance
523-524
521
stages of
theory of type test
520
ManufacturiDg Readiness Review
521
Mapping
123, 125
accw:acy
123-130
budgets
123
definition of
127-129
requirements
Margins (See Propellant margin;
Power margin; Weight margin)
Mariner MK·ll (small spacecraft)
43
and pointing requirements
633
Marisat (eommnnieations satellite)
MlIJ"JD()n damp
336
Mars
891
human mission to
434
thermal environment
thermal geometty factors for
909
Mars Observer
808
cost estimate
Mass
923
units and conversion factors
Mass budget (See Weight budget)
Mass fractions
723
launch systems
715
Orbital Maneuvering Unit
894-896
representative spacecraft
316
typical values
462,476
Mass moment of Inertia (MOl)
482
equations for
495
for deployables
924
units and conversion factors
Mass Spectrometer Incoherent
208
Seatter (MSIS), atmospheric model
Materials (See Spacecraft materials)
275
Materials experiment assembly
667
Math uti1ltil'S (software)
67
MATLAB (COTS software)
916-917
Julian date in
Matrix imager (See also Step and store
268
CIII1U!ras)
291
area array (CCB)
Max q (maximnmdynamic pressure)
742
MCC (See Mission Control Center)
139-140
Mean anomaly
767
Mean MissIon Duration (MMD)
139-140
Mean motion
Mean Response TIme (FJgUre of
174-175
Merit)
899
Mean sea level
778
Mean Tune Between Failures (MTBF)
5
MeasuJ"e!I of Effectiveness (MoEs)
59-61
characteristics pf good

Meclumical DI8II1lt'acturI (See
522
also Manufacturing ofspacecrqft)
494-497
Mechanisms, aerospace
451
thermal challenges
Medium Earth orbit
communications constellations
539,542
(See also constellations)
542
definition of
584-585
examples of
Memory, computer
662-667
estimating needs
Meniscus
444-446
in heat pipes
MEO (See Medium Earth orbit)
Mercury (planet)
434
thermal environment
Mercury (space program)
808
cost estimate
1~102
Meridian (in a coordinate system)
Meteoroids
840--842, 845
in near Earth space
539
Meteosat (weather satellite)
268
scan mechanism
539
use of onboard processing
919
Meter, definition of
919
Metrieprefixe;
Metric (SI) units (See International
System oj Units)
MFSK (Multiple-Frequency Shift
Keying)

559

Microcosm AutonolDODS
506
Navigation System (MANS)
502
advantages and disadV3l)tages
504
characteristics
513
sizing estimate
117
MieroGLOBE (computer program)
204-207
Mierogravity
206
equations for
206
levels of
205
tidal forces in
MICROLAB (small satellite)
855
characteristics of
871
Mierosat (small satellite)
874
cost estimate
Mierospace (See Miniature satellites)
Microwave radiometry
255
characteristics
275
instrument
2S7
payload design considerations
229
Microwave weapons
·464
MIL-HDBK·17 (eomposlte;)
779
MIL-HDBK·217 (reliability)
464
MIL-HDBK·5 (meta1s)
469
MIL-HDBK·5G (metals)
523
MIL Q 9858A (quaHty assurance)
MIl.spec parts
747-748
vs. S-level
MIL-STD- (See StandartlsIStondardization)
MIL-STD-l00 (drawings)

521

954
MIL-STD-483 (coDfiguration
management)
521
MJL.STD.490 (specificotion)
521
MJL.STD.4l19 (requirements)
77,90
MlL-STD-1521 (teclmkal reviews)
521
MlL-STD-1553 (data bus standard)
654
MlL-STD-1750 (computer)
658
MIlitary spedficatloDS
521
no longer maintained
MDstar
antenna
572
Miniature satemtes (See also
UghlSats)
853-881
856-858,869
applications
autonomy in
881
881
bibliography
cost differences compared
with conventional satellites
873-877
definition of
853
design considerations
858-863
distinction from conventional
854
FireSat example mission
approach
869-871
ground-station design
861
guidance and control
techniques
863-864, 877
information processing
865
862,880
integration and test
865
launch systems for
organization for
860-861
862, 877-878,
parts procurement

879-880
power management
864-865,877
879
program management
861-862
quality assurance
redundancy in
861,877
risk assessment
862
scaling differences
871-873
861,878-879
schedules
structural differences
863
when to choose
880-881
162
Miniaturized electroulcs
MInimum shift keying (MSK)
(See also Modulation techniques)
560
Minnte (of arc = angular measure)
conversion factors
915
MIPS (mDllODS of instrnctiODS per
second)

T•

Index

662

Mirrors (in payload design)
258
MIssion analysis
49-59
hierarchy
51
in ongoing programs
883-889
need to consider patents
828
MIssion analysis and design process
overview
1-7
MIssion architecture (See Space
mission architecture}
MIssion cbaracterlzation
19-45
Mission concept (See also Concept
of Operations)
21

identifying alternatives
21-32
selection
69-72
12,15
Mission CODStraints
payload design requirements and
245,249,305
constraints
Mission Control Center (MCC)
627
Air Force Satellite Control Network
637
combined with SOCC and POCC
627
for Tracking and Data Relay
Satellite System
639
location of
627
Mission data recovery equipment
625
Mission design (See also Mission analysis)
612
impact on operations cost
Mission effectiveness (reliablllty)
765
Mission elements (See also
individual elements}
10-12, 32-33, 34-35
Mission geometry
(See also Geometry)
95-130
Mission lifetime
determining requirement
17-18
766
reliability models
Mission Needs Statement
9
Mission objectives
12-15
need for broad
1-3
245-248
payload design
transforming into requirements
15
MISsion operatiODS
43,587-620
automation of
615-618
590
books on
611-615
cost and size estimating
functions of
588-589,600-611
590-600
operations plan development
602,610
personnel training
616
relative cost of functions
615
Space Ops cost model
Mission Operations Plan (MOP)
590-600
558,601-603
Mission planning
bus planning
605-606
Firesat

249

828
need to consider patents
on ongoing programs
883-889
payload planning
606-607
Mission requirements (See
RequiremenlS ofa space mission}
Mission sImnJator (See also
Mission utility analysis)
62-65
317
Mission success criteria
Mission timeline
87
budgets
31
definition of
31
principal elements
Mission utlllty analysis
5,49,59-67
in operations planning
599
62-65
via simulation
Mixture ratio (in propellant)
113
917-918
MJD (Modified Julian Date)
MLE (Most LIkely F8t1:mate)
804
in cost estimating
MLI (See Multilayer insulation)

955

Index
694
MMBPS (rocket engine)
767
MMD (Mean MIssion Duration)
MMB (Monomethyl hydraziDe,
694
See also hydrazine)
Moderate-Resolntion imaging
297-299
spectroradiometer
917-918
Modified Julian Date (MJD)
MODIS (Moderate-Resolution imaging
297-299
Spectroradlometer;
Modulation and coding (See also Data rates)
558-563
comparison table of
techniques
Modulation Tnmsfer Function
(MTF)

562
393
282

MoEs (Measures of Effectiveness)
(See Figures 0/ Merit)
MOl (See Mass moment ofinertia)
Mo1niya orbits (See also Orbits)
537
communications geometry
143
parameters
144
secular variations
180
uses for
182
use by former Soviet Union
182
use of critical inclination
Moment of inertia (See Area momenl
o/inertia, Mass moment o/inertia}
924
units and conversion factors
Momentum, of a spacecraft (See Angular
momentum)
.362
Momentum-bias system
380
FireSat example
379
parameters
362
Momentum dumping
362
Momentum unloading
Momentum wheels (See also
Reaction wheels)
368
definition of
376
FireSat example
370
sizing
319
types of
369
typical parameters
486
Monocoque construction
414
Monocoque structures
Monomethyl hydrazine (MMH,
694
See also Hydrazine)
697-698
Monopropellant engines
MonopropeUantpropuhdon~

(See also Hydrazine)
693
advantages and disadvantages
688
applications of
691
C"of
697-698
design of
691
diagrarnof
692
operating characteristics
Monopulse systems (in commuulcations) 383
Monte Carlo simulation
64,806
(See also Simulation)
Moon
825
bases open to inspection

ephemeris of
498
legal use of
823
orbit pertol'bations due to
142-144
898
phase law
possibility of bases
891
434
thermal environment
510
trajectory to
504
use in satellite navigation
898
visual magnitude
825
Moon Treaty of 1979
839-840
provisions of
825
vs. Antarctic Treaty
590-600
MOP (Mission OperatIODS Plan)
Most LIkely F8t1:mate (MLE)
804
in cost estimating
Motorola (See also Iridium)
747
Six-sigma program
699
Motors, rocket (solid)
712
weight estimation
MPD (magnetoplasmad)'lllllllk)
thrusters (See also Electric
692,693
propulsion)
MSlS (Mass Spectrometer lnconherent
Seatter) atmosphere model)

208

MSK (MInimum Shift Keying)
MTBF (See Mean Time Between FalIures)
MTF (Modulation Transfer
282
Function)
436-438
Mnltilayer insulation
Mnltiple frequem:y shift keying
(MFSK.) (See also Modulation
559
techniques)
Multiplexing
547
ofdata
275
Mnltispectra1 mid-IR Instrument
276
Multispectra1 systems
68-69
MUSE (COTS software)
MV Iaum:h system
728
characteristics of
727
reliability experience
Mylar
436
thermal properties of

-NNlIHllannch system
reliability experience
NA (1l1IJDerical aperture)
Nadir
Nadir angie
definition of
equations for
maximum
table of values
Napier's roles
formulas derived from

673
261
99
102
102
113
119
Insiderearcover
(coL 21-24)

103
904, 905-907

1
Index

956
NASA (See National Aeronautics and
Space Administration)
NatioiuiI Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA; See also Tracking
and Data Relay SateUite System; Space Shuttle)
Buy America Act
834
commercial ISS oppornmities
829
debris mitigation guidelines
840
debris program office
844
full cost accounting
608
Get Away Special
857
launch insurance
831
Link data
386,393,548
1,48
mission design perspective
Nuclear power review
836
orbit detennination by
501
representative smallsats
855,874
requirements development
76-77
role in satellite recovery
822
Space Ops Cost Model
615
Tecbnology readiness level
804
use of commercial data
833
641
use of commercial IT&C
National Bureau of Standards
setting physical constants
835
National Environmental Polley Act
753
NATO m (communications
satellite)
633
mass distribution of
894-8%
Natural frequency
483
Navigation (See also autonomous
navigation)
method comparison
502
data source and uses
500-501
definition of
497
methods of
497-514
mission operations function 589,601,605
payloads for (See also Global
Positioning System)
243
purpose of
500-501
NEAR (smaB satellite)
cost estimate
874
~T (See Noise equivalent
temperature difference)
284
Needs analysis (see also Mission
objectives)
82
Neptune
thermal environment
434
NETD (See Noise equivalent
temperature difference)
Network control
in communications architecture 540-541
Neutral-particle-beam weapons
229
Neutron radiation
223
inability to harden against
233
Newton, Isaac
132
Nickel cadmium (NiCd) (batteries)
420
Nickel-hydrogen (NUl (batteries)
420

v

NIMBUS (weather satellite)
755
NNSS (See Navy Navigation Satellite System)
NOAA spacecraft
559
anomalies
563
Nodal vector (See also Orbit elements)
136
Node spacing
table of values
Inside rear cover
(coL 55-56)
Noise equivalent bandwidth
272
Noise equivalent power (NEP)
272
Noise equivalent temperatnre
difference <N&\T or NETD)
284
computation of, for FireSat
290
Noise figure
557
Noise spectral density
554
Noise temperatnre
antenna
556-557
as a function of frequency
557
receiver
556
system
557
Non-rea1-time processing
604
Non-regenerative repeater
580
North-South drift (See also
Geosynchronous orbit; Orbit
maintenance)
156
North-South stationkeeplng
(See Stationkeeping)
NOVA (small spacecraft)
use of electric propulsion
705
Nozzle, rocket
area exposure ratio
641
throat
691
Nuclear power soun:es (See also
Environmental concerns,
nuclear power sources and; SNAP)
characteristics of
410
COSMOS 954 failure
830
design for safety
837
environmental concerns
825
need for impact statement
836
possible bao
837
static vs. dynamic
409
use in electric propulsion
201
Nuclear weapons environment
222-228
Compton scattering events
226
effects on communications
227-228
electromagnetic pulse (EMF)
224
geomagnetically trapped
radiation
224
illegal in space
823
neutron radiation
223
photo-electric effect
226
prompt radiation
223
system-generated EMP
224
X-radiation
222-223, 226
NumerIcal aperture, of a lens (NA)
261
Nyquist frequency
281
Nyquist, Harry
544

I

•

Index

-0ODC (Onboard computer)
(See Computer systems, spacecrqft)
ObIateness of the Earth
156
effect on orbits
899-901
geodetic coordinates
111
geometry
physical parameters
897
Objeetives (See Mission objectivilS)
904
ObUque spherical triangles
formulas for
907
Observation payloads
274-275
data rates
266-298
design of
287-290
formula summary
266
infrared (IR) systems
266
microwave radiometers
248
photographic techniques
266
radar imagers
275-277
sizing methods
266-268
types of
249-269
visual and IR payload design
266
visible systems
ODCS (Orbit determination and
control subsystem) (See Guidance
and navigation subsystem; Orbit control;
Orbit determination)
OEX (small spacecraft)
769
characteristics of
OFFEQ-3 (small satellite)
855
characteristics of
Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD)
791
inflation factors from
OGO (Orbiting Geophysical Observatory)
314
attitude control
311
configuration of
313
yaw steering
OMEIUR (rocket engine)
694
670
On-orbit cheek-out and ealIbration
832
On-orbit delivery of space systems
573
On-orbit repair and recovery
Onboard processing (See
Computers, spacecrqft)
Onboard software (See Software)
Operating power budget (See Power
budget)
662
Operating system software
666-670
estimating resource needs
830
Operation Morning Light
Operational concept (See Concept
ofoperations)
159
Operational orbit, deftnltlon of
74
Operational requirements
Operations (See Mission operations)
5S6
Operations team
558
design of
Operators, of a space mission
7
definition of

957
Optleal communications (See also
583-584
lasers)
803
as cost risk
Optical elements
451
thermal challenges
Optleal payloads (See Payloads; Infrared
remote-sensing systems; Observation
payloads)
Optleal systems (See also Detectors:
257-265
lR, visible)
282
optical transfer function
258-26S
reflective vs. refractive
68
ORB (COTS software)
ORBCOMM (communications consteDation)
808
cost estimate
810
.cost of
222
effect of nuclear burst
857
launch of
895-8%
mass distribution of
584
parameters of
537
use of store and forward
ORBCOMM (small satellite)
854-855
characteristics of
Orbit control (See also Guidance and
navigation subsystem; Orbit maintenance;
497,507-512
Stationkeeping)
analogy with attitude
498,510-511,512
control
autonomous vs.
510-512
grouod-based
507-512
CO)llponents
512-514
hardware sizing
mission operations function 589,601,605
30,500
need for
507
systems for
500,501
trades
Orbit decay (See Atmospheric drag)
Orbit-defined coordinates (See Rollpitch-yaw coordinates)
Orbit design (See also Orbits;
159-202
ConsteUations )
131
books on
160, 198-199
process summary
requirements and constraints 41-42, 305
140-141
Orbit determination
501
analytical methods
501
books on
501-507
components
497
defmition of
498
real-time vs. definitive
501-507
systems for
Orbit determination and control
subsystem (ODCS) (See Guidance
and navigation subsystem; Orbit control)
135-137
Orbit elements
variations in (See Orbit
perturbations)
117
Orbit n Plus (CO)llputer program)
. Orbit Ufetime (See Orbital lifetime)

-------------------------------------------------------------------~~~---------------

958
Orbit maintenance (See also Altilwk

table of values for

maintenance; Orbital lifetime;
Stationkeeping)
155-157, 4fJ7, 507-512
autonomous vs. grouud-based
of constellations
systems for
Orbit maneuvermg (See also Orbit

510-512
509
507

control; Orbit transfer)
Orbit period (See Period, orbital)
Orbit perturbations (See also
Almospheric drag; Orbit control)

140-153

141-146
144-145
199
508
142-144
142
145-146
498
68
142-144,568

atmospberic drag effects
control of in constellations
control of
non-spherical Earth effects
third-body effects
solar radiation effects
Orbit propagation
COTS software for
general perturbations
software sizing for
66S
special perturbations
142, 568
Orbit transfer (See also Hohmann transfer
orbit, Orbital Transfer vehicle)
140-153,
159-161
coplanar
140-150
formula summary
147-149
Hohmann
140-150
low-thrust
185-186
one-tangent-bum
148
plaue change
150-151
rendezvous
151-153
selection of
183-188
spiraI transfer
149
Orbit Workbench (COTS software)
117
Orbit Works (COTS software)
68
Orbital decay (See Orbital lifetime;

Almospheric drag)
Orbital debris (See also

end-of-life)
avoidance tecboiques
bumper shield system
collision probability of
definition of
design considerations
effect on satellite of impact
from satellite collisions
growth mte of
in LEO andGEO
mitigation tecboiques
nontmckable objects
protection from
Report by lutemgency Group
satellite fragmentation events
space policy on
spatial density of
Orbital lifetime (See also

Almospheric Drag)
curves for
orbit control implications

I

Index

838,840-850
848-849

846-847
844,845
842
844-850
848
19~200

843-844
842-843
849-850
761
846-849
838
760
838
843
2O~211

290-210
478

Inside rear cover
(col. 37-40)

Orbital Maneuvering Unit
propellant mass fraction
Orbital slots, geostationary
allocation of
Orbital Transfer Vebides
table of
Orbiter (See Space Shuttle)
Orbiting Geophysical
Observatory (See OGO)
Orbits (See also Orbit control; Orbit

715

826
233
730

altitude trade
56-57
books on
131, 159
circular velocity
135
Inside rear pages (co. 41-42)
table of
communications arcbitectme
542
constellation (See Constellation)
control of (See Orbit control)
COTS analysis tools
68
coverage simulations
171-173
design of
34,159-202
books on
159
process summary
160, 19~199
requirements and
constrainIs
41-42, 305
determination (See Orbit determination)
137
direct
Earth-referenced
160
183-188
selection of
eccentric (See also eccentric orbits)
182
elements
135-137
equation of motion (2-body)
132-135
equation summary
902-903
escape velocity
135
formulas for
Inside front cover
failure rates, relationship to
709
FrreSat example
182-183
formula summary
902-903
geosyncbronons (See also
Geosynchr01llJUS orbits)
180.182
ground tmck (See GrolDld tracks)
116
Hohmann transfer orbit

(See Hohmann transfer orbit)
impact on opemtions
Keplerian orbits
lifetime (See Orbital lifetime)
low-Earth orbits (LEO, See also

Low-Earth orbits)

table of
~ide rear cover (col. 52)
perturbations (See cilso Orbit
perturbations)
141-146
rendezvous
151-153
retrograde
137
space-referenced
160, 187
specialized
161
standard notation
137
stationkeeping (See Station-keeping;
50~509
Orbit maintenonce) .
Sun-syncbronons (See SlDI-synchronoUS
orbit)
180. 184

perturbations; SlDI-synchro1llJUS orbit;
Molniya orbit; Geosynchronous orbit;
Orbit transfer; Stationkeeping;
ConsteUation)
131-200

612
132-141

182

maneuvers (See also Orbit

moTleUilering)
140-153
Molniya orbit (See Molniya orbits)
143
parking (See Parking orbits) 160, 187-188
patents on
194,828
period
137
formula for
137,168,902

959

Index

trades with attitude

accumcy

83-84, 123-130

transfer orbits (See also Orbit
transfer)
140-153, 159-161
0rsted (small sateIlite)
cost estimate
808
mass distribution of
895-896
OSD (Office of the Secretary of Defense)
791
inflation factors from
856
OSCAR (amateur satellite series)
857-858
characteristics of
874
cost estimate
864
gQidance and control
873
mass comparison
Oxygen, atomic
211
effect on space systems
212
density
117.167
Outer horizon (See also Horizon)
835
Outer Space Treaty of 1%7
824
liability specification
823-827
provisions of

-p1'80-1 (spacecraft)
mass distribution of

894,895

Paints
thermal properties of

436

PaJapa B (small spacecraft)
goidance and control efficiency

comparison

rescue
PAM-D (orbital transfer vehicle)
cbamcteristics of

873
822
731
728
728

Use on Delta launcb vehicle
PAML (Project Approved
522
Materlals List)
522
PAPL (Project Approved Parts List)
133-134
Parabola (conic section)
570-575
Parabolic reflector antenna
476
ParalJd axis theorem (structure)
Parallel lines
non-existent in spherical coordinates 102
766
ParalJd redundancy
Parallels '(In spheriral coordinates)
100
791-802
Parametric cost estimates

787
793
787-788
758

definition of
FireSat characteristics
procedure for computing
~Prindple

Parking orbit (See also Orbits)
definition of
selection of
use for satellite stomge

160
183.187-188
188

Parts (See piece parts, S-level parts)
Pascal (computer language)
Pascal (unit of pressure)
Pass, over ground station (See also

GrolDld systems, grolDld tracks)
formula summary

parameter computation
Passive analog data

666
924

13
117-122
398

PassIve rodiators
451
for cryogenic cooling
428
Passive thermal control
440
Pakhheater
Patents
834
military limits on export
194.828
on orbits
827-828
on space systems
551
Path loss (link budget)
Patbfindlng
in satellite manufacturing
759
Payload (oflannth vehicle = space segment)
719
definition
integmtion with launch system
735
Payload (of space segment
MIssion payload) (See also
Observation payloads)
41-44.241-:-300
applications payloads
243
as drivers of spacecraft design
304-306
books on design of
242
285
budgeting by components
cbamcteristics of
42, 243, 245-248
communications payloads
242-243
sizing of
570-575
concept of operations
245-6. 248
cost estimates
796
critical pammeters
284-286
12.241
definition
design requirements and

=

constraints

305

241
Earth-looking remote sensing
291-297
FireSat sizing example
243-244
Innovative
41
mission payload concept
observation payload
242-243.266-298
overview·
249
opemtionaI constraints
247
opemtions
279-280
optical instrument
250
performance threshold
248
performance vs. cost
314
power budget
283
radiometric performance
242-243
remote sensing

TI
representative masses of
894
scaling from existing systems
284
scientific payloads
243-244
selection and design process
245-248
251
sensors
245-248, 278-291
sizing
trade studies for
234-238
243-244
weapons
Payload fairings (See Fairings)
Payload mass fraction (lanneh
systems)

723

Payload Operations Control Center
(POCC)

Index

Index

960

627~39

Air Force Satellite Control
Network
637
demuJtiplexing with
634
locating
627
number of
642
role of
626
spacecraft autonomy with
635
use with TDRSS
639
Payload simnlator (See also Mission
simulator)
62
PCM (Pulse Code Modulation; see
also Modulation techniques)
393
PD (Proportionul plus
derivative) controller
379
PDR (Preliminary Design Review)
649,664
Peaceful use of space
legal requirement for
823
Peak-power tracker (pPr; in power
regulation)
425
Pegasus launch system
731
characteristics of
728
802
cost estimates
fundamental frequency
741
reliability experience
727
small satellite launch
860
use for small satellites
860
user's guide for
744
Pellet weapons
229
Pentriad (communications constellation)
example of MOO system
539
parameters of
585
Percent Coverage (Figure of Merit)
176
Performance (See Payloads; Mission
utility analysis)
drivers (See System drivers)
margin
in launch systems
724
parameters
59-60
plateaus (in conste11ation design)
190
quantification techniques
57-59
Perigee kick motor (PKM)
306
Period, orbltai
computation from groundtrack
137
formulas for
137,168,902
in Kepler's third law
132
table of values Inside rear cover (coL 52)
Personnel training (See Training)

Perturbations (See Orbit perturbations)
Phase coherence, communication
381-382
Phase modulation (PM)
393
Phase quadrature moduJation (PQM)
393
Phase shift keying (PSK)
378
Phased array antenna
572
Pbaslng orbit (See also Orbits:
149-151
Rendetvous)
PhotlHlectric effect
226
Photo response nonnniformity
272
Photometric imaging instruments
275
Photon detector (see Detector, photon)
Photovoltaies (See also solar array)
409,411
current-voltage plot
415
design
411-418
energy-conversion efficieocy
413
gallium-arsenide cells
413
indium-phosphide cells
413
inherent degradation
414
low-cost technologies
876
open-circuit voltage
414
peak-power point
414
performance comparison
414
performance degradation
407
planar array
416
radiation damage
417
shadowing considerations
416
short-circuit current
414
siliron cells
413
temperature coefficient
415
Physical constants (See Constants)
pi (7t)
accurate value for
927
Piece parts (See also Commerr:ial parts;
S-level parts)
in multi-spacecraft
manufacturing
747-748
nomenclature for
519
procurement times
522
reliability of
771-772
selection of
752-753
Pioneer (interplanetary probe)
communication link for
563
808
cost estimate
97,341
Pitch (orbit-defined coordinate)
244, 274, 281
Pixel
PKM (perigee kick motor)
306
Planck's Law (PIanek's equation)
256
blackbody radiation curves
256

PJanets
ephemerides of
497
thermaI geometty factors for
908-909
Plnsma diagnosties instrument
275
Plasmas (See also Space
ellVironment)
204,212-214
258
Plate seale
formula for
259
Plesetsk (launch site)
location of

Plume (See &hm.tst plumes)

733

Pluto
434
thermal environment
Pluto Express (small satellite)
895-8%
mass distribution of
393
PM (Phase Modulation)
547
PN code (Pseudorandom code)
POCC (See Payload Operations
Control Center)
Point coverage simnlation
172
(See also Earth coverage)
53
Point design
263
Point spread function
123
Pointing
129-130
accuracy
4,123-130
budgets
304,313,319
design approaches
363
effect on ADCS design
128-130,356
requirements
126,499-500
trades vs. mapping
Polar angle (see True anomaly)
133
definition of
133
Polar equation of a conic section
Polar orbit
137
definition of
154
launch azimuth for
729
launch vehicle capacity to
366
maguetic torque in
225
radiation dose in
839
SNAP lOA spacecraft in
227
Polarimeter
389
Polarization, antenna
PoKey
821-840
impact on space missions
828-829
U.S. space policy
Polybutadiene
699
in rocket propellant
PoSat (small satellite)
855
characteristics of
808
cost estimate
895-8%
mass distribution of
379
Position gain
Power
924
units and conversion factors
314-318
Power budget (See also Budgets)
345
examples
315
steps in preparing
Power flux density
565
maximum allowed
461,462
Power speetruI density (PSD)
Power subsystem (See also Solar array;
304, 407-427
Balteries; Photovoltaics)
battery depth-of-discharge
333
vs. cycle life
304,315,407
beginning-of-life (BOL)
409-410
Brayton-cycle engine
795-797
cost estimates
332-335, 408
design of
408
directed-energy transfer
409
dyIiamic power
electric propulsion

961
702,705
requirements
304,407
end-of-life (BOL)
409
energy balance
energy storage (See also
418-422
Balteries)
409-410
fuel cells
407
functional breakdown of
864-866
on small satellites
408
peak power tracker
409,411-418
photovoltaic cells
316
power consumption
423-424
power distribution
425
design
426
direct-energy-transfer
424
fault protection
423
load profile
665-666
software sizing for
423
switches
334,424-425
power regulation
427
design
427
fully regulated subsystem
426
quasi-regulated subsystem
425
shunt regulator
426
unregulated subsystem
409
Rankine-cyc1e engine
411
regenerative fuel cell
894
representative masses of
407
requirements for
332-335
sizing
407-418
sources of power
409
static power
409
Stirling-cyc1e engine .
408
system-level parameter effects
409
thermionic energy conversion
409
thermoelectric couple
334
weight and power budget
393
PPM (Pu1se position modulation)
425-426
PPr (peak-power tracker)
PPr (Pu1sed plam1a tbroster)
(See Electric propulsion)
393
PQM (phase quadrature moduJation)
361
Precession, of a spinning spacecraft
Precession of the equinoxes (See
also Vernal equinox)
898
data
96-97
definition of
6%
Precombustion chambers
606
"PredIct-prevent" ranure anulysfs
649,664
PrelIminary DesIgn Review (PDR)
806
Present vulne (in cost estimating)
Pressurant gns
714
calculation of mass
713
requirements for
Pressure
924
units and conversion factors
739
Pressure differential, launch
PrImary batteries (See Balteries, primoTy)
PrImary data
833
vs. processed data
334
Primary power source

~c

962

Index

Principles Relating to Remote
Sensing of the Earth from Space
(U.N. General Assembly

resolution)

832-833

Principles Treaty (See Outer Space

Treaty of 1967)
.823
Process charaderlzation models
759-760
Process control in mannfactnring
(See also Qualification program)
development and verification 759-760. 774
Process tables
Inside front cover
attitude determination and
control subsystem design
356
command and data handling
subsystem
331.399
communications architecture
534
communications subsystem
design
329.388
computer system development
647
concept characterization
39
concept of operations
22
constellation design
198
cost estimates
792
delta V budget
178
ground segment
624
guidance and navigation
subsystem design
499
identifying alternative
mission architectures
33
link design and payload Sizing
551
launch segment
720
missions operations planning
591
orbit selection
160
observation sensor design
287-290
payload design overview
246
power subsystem design
408
propulsion subsystem
selection and sizing
687
requirements definition
93
solar may design
412
space mission analysis and design
2
spacecraft bus
design overview
302
preliminary design
307
requirement sources
305
spacecraft qualification
program design
528
spacecraft structures size
and mass estimation
486
structures and mechanisms
459
subject trades
253
system trade process
56
thermal design
430
Process verification tests
748
Processed data
vs. primary data
833
Processing ArclIiteeture (See Computer
systems. spacecrqft: architectures)
Processors (See Computer systems. spacecraft)
Production management

in sateUite manufacturing
759
Profit
in cost models
789
Prograde orbit (direct orbit,
See also Orbit)
137
Program initiation
9
Programmable read-only memory
(PROM)
656
Project Approved Materials LIst
(pAML)
522
Project Approved Parts LIst (PAPL)
522
Project West Ford
and space contamination
824
Proliferation (Redundant nodes)
236
PROM (Programmable Read-Only
Memory)
656
Prompt radiation
223.230
Propellant budget (See also
Delta V budget)
314
FireSat example
340
FLTSATCOM example
344
for representative spacecraft
894-895
formulas for mass of
690
maintaining margin in
179
spin stabilization
271-273
thrce-axis stabilization
273-276
Propellant management
708-709
Propellant mass fraction
(Iaunc:h systems)
723
Propellant tanks
708-710
Propellants (See also Propellant budget;
Propellant Tf/lUI(lgement;
Propulsion subsystem)
301
advantages and disadvantages
for spacecraft, table of
693
amount for representative
spacecraft
894-895
densities of
692
design margin
713
feed approaches
708-709
mass calculation equation for
690
712-713
mass estimation
performance and operating
characteristics. table of
692
Proportional plus derivative
(PD) controller
379
Propu1sion module (See Kick stage)
Propu1siOD subsystem
302, 318. 685-718
basics of
688-691
component selection
and sizing
708-716
design of
318.687-688
functions of
685.686
gas storage systems
709
metered
302
power budget
316.318
pressure-fed systems
708
principal options
687.693-708
process table for selection
and sizing
687

963

Index
pump-fed systems
708
894
representative masses of
685
requirements
687-688
selection and sizing
693-708
types of
cold gas
693
weight of
316.318.712, 715
652
Protocol (See also FrP. /p. TCP. UDP)
612
command-response
652
definition of
612
token-passing
798
Prototllght approacll
731
Proton lannc:h system
728
characteristics of
741
fundamental frequency
727
reliability experience
744
user's guide for
Protons
220
damage in electronic devices
217-218
from solar particle events
215-217
in space environment
461
PSD (power spectrnI density)
547
Psendorandom (PN) code
Pull production systems
(manufacturing technique)
755
393
Pulse Code Modulation (PCM)
273
Pulse compression (c:hlrping)
393
Pulse Posltlon Modulation (PPM)
Pulsed Plasma Thruster (PPT)
(See Electric propulsion)
268-270
Pushbroom scanner
232
focal planes
460-461
Pyroteclmic shock

529

test

-QQPSK (Quadriphase phase
shift keying)
Quad-helix antenna

Quadrantal spherical triangles
formulas for

392, 558
572
103.904
906

Quadripbase Phase Shift Keying

(QPSK)
397.558
Qnalification program
524-530
525
component testing
528
design of
748-749
in multi-spacecraft production
520
qualification tests
520
Qna1lIied design, definition of
523-524
Qnality assurance
524
elements of
Qnality factor (in observation payloads) 264
Qnality Function Development
(QFD)
Quantum eftldem:y (See specific

detectivity )

78-80
271

Quasl-reguIated power subsystem (See also

Power subsystem, Power regulation)

426

QuaternioDS
Quiescent environment testing

380
780

-RR-40B (rocket engine)
R4-D (rocket engine)
R42 (rocket engine)
Bad (radiation absorbed dose;
unit of measure)
RAD 6000 (onboard compnter)
characteristics of
Radar (See also specific systems.
i.e.• GEOSAT. RORSAT)

694
694
694
216
669

266
167-168
243-244
active remote sensing
238
decoys for
for sateUite tracking
503-503. 629. 842
GBOSAT example
311
483
on Magellan
140
orbit determination using
pbased may vs. reflector
56
265
resolution
RORSAT example
825.837
access area

subject trades for
typical instruments
Radar Ocean Reconnaissance
Satellites (RORSAT)
Radar remote-sensing systems

254

275
837
266

RadarSat (spacecraft)

846
debris shielding
RADeAL (small satelBte)
808
cost estimate
895-896
mass distribution of
Radian (angular measure)
conversions for
920
102
definition of
257
Radiant emittance, total
RadIation (See Electromagnetic
radiation; Th£rmal radiation; Nuclear
weapons environment)
439-440
RadIators
435
for thermal control
453
requirements for
RadiatIon belts (See Trapped radiation. Vtul
Allen belts)
RadIo 1&2 (small spacecraft)
769
characteristics of
Radio frequency spectrum (See RF)
Radiotsotope thermoelectric
generators (RTGs) (See also
334
Power sub:;ystem)
Radiometrie resolution (See Resolution.
radiometric)
266
Radiometry

performance
po1arimeters
radiometers

283
277
277

964

Index

m

scatterometers
Radius of apogee
133,135
formulas for
90S
Radius of perigee
133,135
formulas for
904
Raduga (communications satellite)
571
Rain attenuation
564-S6S
Random access memory (RAM)
656
Random vibration
461
Range and range rate
code
383
function
382
in1T&C
381-383
use in orbit determination
503
Range to target
119
Rankine-cyde engines
(See also Power subsystem)
409
Rate gain
379
Rate-l/2 convolutional code
561
Rayleigh diffraet10n criteria (See also
Rayleigh limit)
264
Rayleigh, Sir John
264
RCA (communications satellite)
633
RCS (reaction control system)
(See Propulsion systems)
RDD 100 (COTS software)
in requirements development
89
RDT&E (Research, Development, Test
and Evaluation cost category)
786
Reaction curves (in spaceeraft
computers)
663
Reaction wheels
319
definition of
368
derived, payload
247
FLTSATCOM example
347-348
payload design
245
performance range
369
sizing
370
software sizing
665
thennal requirements for
428
Read Only Memory (ROM)
658
Real-time processing
648
Receive RF equipment
625
Received isotropic power (RIP)
555
Receiver noise bandwidth
554
Reduced Instruction Set Computer (RISC)
throughput rating
667
Redundancy (See also Fault tolerance)
functional
779
in attitude control
375
inFireSat
59
in FLTSATCOM
343
in ground system
627-628
in low-cost spacecraft ~64, 872, 882
in onboard computer
682
in orbit coverage
190
in software architecture
654
in1T&C
390-391,394
k-out-of-n
TI8
reliability improvement and
m-779

requirements for
16
series vs. parallel
766
software management of
773
software methods for
659-660
types of
TI7-778
use of failure modes analysis
770
Redundant nodes (security)
236
Reed-Solomon code
563
Reference eUipsoid (for Earth figure)
899
Reference point (of a coordinate
system)
100
ReDedive optical system
258,261-262
ReDector antenna
570
ReDectors
tbermal properties .of
436
Refraction (See SteUar refraction)
Refractive optical system
258,261-262
Refrigerators
for cryogenic cooling
451
Regenerative cooling
696
Regenerative transponder
580
Regulated pressnrlzation system
708
Rdative quaHty Index (payloads)
286
Relative stationkeeping
vs. absolute stationkeeping
508-509
Relay communications systems
table of bandwidths
550
Relay MIrror Experiment (RME)
43
RelIability
338-339,765-782
analyses
765-768
budget for
317
definition of
765
design for
768-773
design for fault avoidance
773-TI9
effect of partitioning
778
failure rates vs. complexity
769
"infant mortality" of spacecraft
338
mean mission duration
.
767
measurements of
765-768
models of
766
single-string
338
progrant for
765,769-771
satellite manufacturing
objectives
746-747
software
n2-TI3
system vs. mission
765
test techniques
n9-781
Reliability budget
317
Remote sensing
and space law
832-833
examples
291-298
payload design
~278
payloads
242-243
Remote-sensing systems (See Observation
Payloads)
Rendezvous (See Orbits: rendezvous; Orbit
maneuvering; Orbit transfer; Phasing orbit)
155-156,180
RepeatIng ground track orbit
RequIrements of a
space mission
12,49,73-94,245

965

Index
allocation of (See also budgeting)
80
attitude vs. orbit
~
definition
5
example
~8
geolocation
81-82
initial
83-86
process of
8~1
refining of
88-90
baseline
93-94,247
closure
80
decomposition
80
documentation of
91
early definition of
3
effect on orbit design
180, 181
FireSat Example
16
methods for trading on
888-889
operational
15,74
orbit-related
161
preliminary estimate of
15-18
role in system development
74-80
specification of
90-93
tailoring of
92
ttaceability
91-92
validation milestone
10
vs. objectives
13
Research, Development, Test and
Evaluation cost category (RDT&E)
786
Resistance
units and conversion factors
922
Resistojets (See Electric propulsion)
Resolution
263-265
ground (linear)
264
optical
264
275,m,278
radiometric
275-276,278
spatial
specttal
275-276,278
Response Thne (Figure of Merit)
174
Retargeting

of orbit
508
Retrograde orbits
137
Return Hnk (See also Communication links)
alternate definitions of
535
RF (radio frequency) (See also Jamming)
defmition ofbands
255
224
noise from nuclear bursts
part of communications
architecture
542
regulatory limits
566
typical1T&C parameters
394
vs. laser crosslinks
583
RH32 (onboard computer)
characteristics of
669
RIbbon (structure element)
482
Right ascension of the ascending node
(See also Orbit elements)
136
136, 142
formulas for
142-144
rate of change of
table of values
Inside rear cover
(col. 56)
904
Right spherical triailgIes

differences from
103-105
plane triangles
103-105
examples of
90S
formulas for
RIng an:hiteeture,
in onboard processing
653
RIP (ReceIved Isotropic Power)
555
RlSC (Reduced Instruction Set Computer)
667
throughput rating
694
RLlO-A (rocket engine)
RME (Relay Mirror Experiment)
43
Rocket (See also propulsion system)
693
engine vs. motor
Rocket engines
694
bipropellant
692, 699-701
hybrid
697
hydrazine
701
ion
463
modules
691,694
monopropellant
713
sizing
696
topping cycle
692, 693, 697-698
water electrolysis
690
Rocket equation
699
Rocket motors, soUd
712
sizing
692,699-701
Rockets, hybrid
97,355
Ron (orbit-defined eoordlnates)
96-97
RoD-pltch-yaw coordinates
355
FireSat example
362
Roll-yaw coupHng
ROM (See Rough Order ofMagnitude;
Read Only Memory)
RORSAT (Radar Ocean
837
Reconnaissance Satellite)
99,101
Rotation angle
20
Rough order of magnitude (ROM)
908
Royal Greenwich Observatory
694
RS-41 (rocket engine)
RTG (Radioisotope ThermoeIeetrie
334
Generator)
667
Ron-time kernel (software)
RussIa (including former Soviet
Union, See also Proton, Energia)
733
launch sites
728,731
launch systems
834
role in Outer Space Treaty
833
sale of satellite imagery
506
satellite navigation system
706-707
use of electric propulsion
837
use of nuclear propulsion in space

-SS-band communications
S-Ievel parts
in multi-spacecraft
manufacturing

329,394
522
747-748

S80ff (small satellite)

cbaracteristics of
854
SIC (See Spacecraft)
Safety, factor of
468
Safety, margin of
468
Sampex (small satellite)
cost estimate
808
mass distribution of
895-896
Sampling rate
544.545
Nyquist frequency
281
281-282
observation payload
spatial frequency
281
San Marco Launch Platform
location of
733
Sandpiper missile (hybrid rocket)
701
Sandwich (structure element)
482-483
Sapblr (small satellite)
characteristics of
855
cost estimate
874
SAR (See Synthetic aperture radar)
SARA (small satellite)
characteristics of
854
"Satellite diversity" (I:Omnnmic:atious
tec\mlque)
582-583
Satellite Swltched-TDMA
576
(SS-TDMA)
68. 117
Satellite Tool Kit (COTS software)
SateJIites (See also Spacecrqft)
apparent motion of
117-123
ground back of (See Ground tracks)
116
lifetimes (See also Atmospheric
drag)
208-211
motion of (See Orbits)
Sattrack (small satellite)
characteristics of
855
Saturn
thermal environment
Saturn launch system
costes~

434

8m

SC (onboanl computer series)
~ticsof

M9

Sc:a\e (See also magnification)
259
Sc:a\e heIght (atmosphere)
211
atmospheric density
145
table of values Inside rear cover (coL 25)
Sc:aHger, Joseph
invention of Julian dates
914
Sc:aIing
spacecraft sizing by
285
Scmming techniques (payload)
SCAT (Secondary Combustion
Augmented Thruster)

Sc:atterameters
SeD-I (small satellite)
characteristics of
Scenarios
use in operations planning
Scene temperature
Schedule (See also runeline)
payload design

268-270
688-689
277
855
'597-598
284
245-248

967

Index

Index

966

Scheduled software architecture
Sdunidt telescope optics
Sdentlfic payloads
SdntilIatlon
Scrubber (I:Omputer memory)

SDI (See Strategic Defense lnitiaJive)
SDR (System Deslgn Review)
SE (Standard Error)
in cost estimating
SED (Single-event burnout)
Second (of an: = angular measure)
conversion factors
Second (time)
conveISion factors
, definition of
Second moment of area (See Area

656
262
243-244

564
~1

664
804
220

920
924-925

919

moment o/inertia)
Secondary batteries (See Batteries. secondary)
Secondary Combnstion Augmented
Thruster (SCAT)
688-689
Secondary power SOUI"al
334
143
Sectoral terms (geopotentiaI)
582
Secnrity, of I:Omm Dnks
SEDS I (small satellite)
855
characteristics of
Segment spedfic:ations
89
SEI (Software EngIneering Jnstitnte)
software standards
67~71
SEL (singIe-event Iatchnp)
220
Semimajor axis (See also
131.133.135
Orbit elem£nrs)
905
formulas for
133
Semlminor axis
Semimonocoque strudnres
464
Sensors
attitude conOOI (See AttiJude

determination sensors)
comparison of payload type
SEP (See Single-event phenomena)
Separation plane attachments
mannon clamp

separable bolts
SerIal telemetry interface
Series redundancy
Set point

245.275
336
336
398
7M

thermal
441
SEU (Single-Event Upset)
6.220-221
SGEMP (System-Generated
Electromagnetic Pnlse)
224. 234
SGLS (See Space-Ground Link System)
Shannon-Hartley theorem
562
562-563
Shannon limit
Shal'it
Small satellite launch
860
Shielding (See also Hardening)

against hostile environment
against natnral radiation
Shock characterIsties Iannch
Shock testing (of tomponents)
Short wave infrared

224-236
216
741
524
2M. 270

Shroud (launch vehicle, See Fairings)
Shunt regulators (in power regulation)
425
Shuttle (See Space Shuttle)
SI (International System ot'Units)
919-927
Signal processing, imagers
279
anaIog
280
di~~
280
Signal-to-nolse quantization
~545
Signal-to-nolse ratio (SIN) 278. 286. 290. 561
computation of. for observation
290
payload
Signature

238
decoy duplication of
277
distinguishing features
of the subject
251.274
Silicon
in photovoltaics
413.414
SlnmIation (See also Mission simulator;
Payload simulator)
58-59.61-65
animation uses
65
Monte Carlo
64
SlnmIationIVerific:ation (SImIVer)
635
SlnmIators (See Mission simulator;
Payload simulator)
SingIe-event phenomena (SEP)
219
memory scrubbing to prevent
Ml
single-event burnout (SED)
220
sing1e-eventlatchup (SEL)
220
sing\e-event upset (SHU)
6. 220-221
Six-sigma design process
746-747.781
Sizing (See also elem£nt being sized)

mission, estimate o f '
52
payloads
245-248. 278-291
software (See Computers. spacecrcift:
sizing and timing estimates)
spacecraft
estimating parameters
336-337
Skybridge (comnnmic:atious I:OnstelIatlon)
constellation design
539
SkyLab
808
cost estimate
264
Slant range
355
Slew manenvers
364
requirements
SLOC (See Source lines of code)
68
SMAD (COTS software)
SmaDdrde

99

SmaD Satellite Cost Model (SSCM)
797
CERs based on
SmaD-sateIlite programs (See
Miniature satellites; UghtSats)
SMM (See Solar Maximum Mission)
SNAP (Systems for nndear auxiIIary
power)
836-837
Sneak Circuit Analysis
770
SOCC (See Spacecrcift Operations
Control Center)
Software
648
application
MI
conOOI system

COTS
custom-developed
embedded
'
mission-data
onboard (See also Computers.

671-672
671
648

Ml

645
spacecrqft)
800
cost estimates
648.MI
operating system
772
reliability methods for
623
sizing methods
Ml
~'Ystem management
Saftware EngIneering Institute (SEI)
software standards
670-671
Software RequIrements Spedftc:ation
Ml
Software Speclfic:ation Review (SSR)
664
Solar A (small satellite)
854
characteristics of
Solar absorptivity (See Absorptivity)
Solar activity (See Solar cycles)
Solar arrays (See also
312-313.332, 415
Photovollaics)
416-417
back-surface reflectors
416
body-mounted
416-417
coatings
416
concenbator solar mays
417
cosine loss
416
coverslide
332
cylindrical mays
415
definition
411-418
design process
412
design process IlIble
414
inherent degradation
315.417
life degradation
415
operating temperatures
332.416
planar arrays
415
I-V plot
417
radiation damage
ru\es for estimating area
337
offset and moment of inertia
416
shadowing
417
Sun-incidence angIe
Solar cells (See also Solar arrays;
Photovoltaics)
415
temperature coefficient
429
Solar constant
Solar cycles
218
list. 1979 to 2029
897
properties of
205
solar flux variations
825.837
Solar MaxInmm MIssion (SMM)
Solar panels
428
thermal requirements for
217-218
Solar particle event (SPE)
Solar radiation
145-146
effect on orbit
432
flux
109-110
intensity computation
256.267
spectral characteristics
897
to~ emitted radiation
visibility (See Eclipse)

968

Index

Solar sail
179
Solid angle (= angular area)
IDlits and conversion factors
920
Solid rocket motors
693
advantages and disadvantages of
applications of
687-688
design of
699
example systems
699
opemting characteristics
692
Solid state amplifiers (See Amplifiers,
solid state)
Sound pressure level (SPL)
742
Sounders (IR imagers)
276
Source lines of code (SLOe)
675
converting to words of memory
666
Soviet Union (See Russia)
Soyuz/Molniya launch system
cost of
802
reliability experience
727
Space
characteristics of, used by
space missions
14
Space environment (See also Nuclear weapons
environment; Orbital debris; Environmental
concerns)
203-240
books on
203
design requirements and constraints
305
effect on thermal surfaces
435-436
galactic cosmic rays
218-221
impact on operations
612
microgravity
204--207
orbital debris
840--852
plas~
212-214
solar particle events
217-218
space charging
212-214
thermal
431-434
trapped radiation
214-217
upper atmosphere
207-212
Van Allen radiation belts (See
Van Allen radiation belts)
Space-Ground Link System (SGLS)
as communicationsrelay element
43
393
attributes
compatibility with
389
communication subsystem
data rates
638
tumaroundratio
381
Space mission ardIItecture
21
characterizing
39-45
definition of
4, I ~ 11
il;lentifying alternatives
32-36
Space mission life cycle (See also Life cycle)

7-10
System engineering during
Space Operations Cost Model
Space payloads (See Payloads)
Space policy
overview of U.S.
Space radiators (See Radiators;
11rermal subsystem)

901-902
615
828-829
439-440

Space-referenced orbit (See also Orbits)
defmition of
160
selection of
183, 187-188
Space segment (See also Spacecroft. Payload)
cost estimating relationship
795-797
defmition of
12
Space Sextant
506
advantages and disadvantages
502
list of characteristics
504
sizing estimate
513
Space Shuttle (Orbiter)
active debris avoidance
849
contamination
7I5
cost estimates
802, 808
dynamic envelope
461
External Tank structure
459
fundamental frequency
741
injection accuracy with IUS
742
keel fittings
336
launch system characteristics
728
.prelaunch training
564
reliability experience
727
retrieval of spacecraft
163
rocket engine for
6%
role in rescue ofWestar VI
822
safety requirement for
698
small satellite launch system
865
sound pressure level in
742
use as launch system
731
use for orbit maintenance
507
user's gnide for
744
Space Stotion (See International Space Station)
SP!lCC Surveillance Network
debris tracking
842
Space Tech Res Vehicle (small satellite)
characteristics of
855
Space Telescope
cost estimate
808
cost vs. performance
248
distribution of payload control
29
key system trades
54
187
parking orbit, use of
payload planning
568
repair and recovery featnres
573
star catalog
68
subject trades
2S4
use of Orbiter
507
Space Transportation System (STS)
(See Space Shuttle)
Space vs. ground processing (See
also Autorwmy)
25-26
Spacecraft (See also Spacecraft bus;
Payload; individual subsystems)
autonomy (See Autonomy)
characteristics
44
commanding
574
components temperatnre ranges
428
computer system (See Computer systems.
spacecraft)
control (See Attitude determination

Index
and control system; Guidance
and navigation system)
design and sizing
301-352
design for manufactmability
745-764
disposal of (See Disposal o/spacecraft)
estimating dimensions
312
examples
configurations
309--311
FireSat
339-341
FLTSATCOM
341-351
HBAO
341-351
Iridium
762-764
hardening (See Hardening ofspacecraft)
hardware nomenclature
519
impact of design on operations
614
Iridium assembly process
762-764
mannfacturing
519-523
processor (See Computer systems,
spacecraft)
745-764
quantity production of
308-311
representative confignrations
representative mass
distribution
894-8%
separation from launcher
322
size estimating rules
33fr337
testing
519,520,523-531
Spncecraft bus (See also Spacecraft;
Miniature satellite technology; and
301
individual topics and subsystems)
795-797
cost estimates
11,12
definition of
301-351
design and sizing
302
functions of
Spncecraft-centered celestial
106
sphere
115
view of Earth on
212-214
Spacecraft charging
308-314
Spncecraft configuration
308,312
drivers
309--311
examples of
FLTSATCOM and HBAO
example
341-344
effect of pointing and attitode control 313
Spacecraft coordinates
96--97, 355
names of components
102
Spacecraft design
301-351
books on
301
configuration examples
309--311
design budgets
314-318
examples of
308-314,339-351
integration
33fr339
reliability
336-339
requirements and constraints
305
tradeoffs
307
Spacecraft materials
463-466, 472-473
Spncecraft OperatIons Contra)
626-641
Center (SOCC)
634
demuItiplexing with
642
nmnberof
626-627
role of

969
spacecraft autonomy with
635
use with TDRSS
639-640
Spncecraft operations (See Missian
operations)
Spacecraft subsystems (See also
specific subsystem)
302-304,318-336,
353-514
attitude determination and
354-380,319-328
control
command and data
handling
330, 345-407
communications
328-329,381-394
gnidance and navigation
497-514
power
332-335,407-427
propulsion
318,685-717
strnctnres and
mechanisms
335-336,459-497
thermal
3~332, 428-458
Spacecraft testing
519-531, 67~71
Spaceflight TrackIng and Data
Network (STDN)
592
ground-support scheduling
Spatial frequency (See Sampling rate)
275-276, 278
Spatial resolntion
SPE (Solar particle event)
217-218
Special perturbations
142, 568
(Orbit propagation)
135
Speclfic angular momentum
Speclfic detectivity (D* = Quantum
efficiency)
271-273
Speclfic heat capacity
924
units and conversion factors
Speclfic impulse Osp> (See also
176,689
Propulsion)
689
definition of
689,691
equations for
134
Speclfic mechanical energy
~94
Speclfications
91
defmition of
887
need for reasons
245-247
payload
Spectral characteristics of
remote-sensing Instruments
255-257
Spectral Irradianee
256
Spectral radiance
2S6
Spectrum (See Electromagnetic spectrum)
Spherical aberration.
261
Spherical excess
102-103
98-110
Spherical geometry
formnlas for
904
Spherical triangles
99-109
formnlas for
904-907
right vs. quadrantal
904
differences from plane
104-105
triangles
examples of
104,105
Spin stabilization
319
angnIar impnlse reqnirement
326-328
dual-spin
313,319,360
effect on antenna design
392

-

-------------------------------------------------------

970

Index
key parilmeters

379

nutation
361
passive spin
319
patent on
828
precession
361
propellant budget
314
use on smaU satellites
864
with precession control
319
wobble
361
SPL (Sonnd pressure levcl)
742
Sponsor, of a space mission
definition of
7
SprIng constant
483
Sputnik (first artificial satellite)
541,853
Sriharikota (1annch site)
location of
733
SRM-I motor
699
SROSS (smaU satellite)
characteristics of
8S4-8S5
SRS (Software Requirements
Specification)
661
SS-TDMA (Satellite Switdled-TDMA)
576
SSCM (See smaU Satellite Cost Model)
SSP (Subsatellite point)
112, 165, 167
SSR (Software Specification Review)
664
SSTL (See Surrey Space Technology

Laboratory; UoSAT)
Stability (in structural members)
470,
Staging
716-111
velocity increments
716
Stand-down time (for launch vehicles)
726
Standard Error (SE)
in cost estimating
804
StandardslStandardization

(See also MIL-STD, DOD-STD)

77

STAR (rocket motors) (See also

PAM, Orbit transfer vehicle)

699

Star architecture (in onboard processing) 653
Star catalogs
COTS Hubble catalog
68
Star Lynx (communications constellation)
examples of MEO systems
539
parameters of
585
Star mappers (See Star sensors)
STAR-RH (onboard computer)
characteristics of
669
Star sensors
322,373-374
software sizing
665
thermal requirements for
428
Star trackers (See Star sensors)
Starfish (bigh-altitude nuclear test)
222
Starsys (communications consteDation)
example of Little LEO
539
parameters of
5SS
use of store and forward
537
Slate diagram
for onboard computer
650-651
Static: power sources (See also
Power subsystem)
409
Statically determinate stroctnre
410

Index

Station control center
StatioDkeeplng (See also Orbit
maintenance; Orbit

maneuvering)

626
156,497
508-509
702, 704, 700

absolute vs. relative
electtic propulsion for
formula summary
Inside front cover
geosynchronous
487,509-510
use of autonomous orbit

maintenance
in consteUations
need for
Statistical analysis
Gaussian math model
in cost modeling
inappropriateness for
coverage
non-Gaussian cost model
terminology

511
199
508
805
803-806
173,175-176
804
804

S11>N(Spa~tTracldng

and Data Network)
592
Stefan-Boltzmann constant
439
Stefan-Boltzmann equation
257,439
SteUar refraction (navigation approach)
advantages and disadvantages
502
list of characteristics
504
sizing estimate
513
use in navigation systems
506
Stentor (French spacecraft)
use of electtic propulsion
700
STEP-3 (smaU satellite)
characteristics of
855
Step and stare scanner imaging mode 268-270
Steradian (angular orea)
conversions for
920
definition of
102
Stiftiless (in stroctural members)
410
Stirllng-cycle engines
(See also Power Subsystem)
409
Storage orbit (See also parking orbit)
188
Store-and-forward
COIIIJDIJIIicatns
536-537.539,859
examples of
585
low cost systems
859,868
StraIn (See also Stress)
411
Poisson's ratio
411
StraIn energy
470
Strategic Defense IDitlatlve (SDI)
234,837
potential role of Space Station
827
"Streets of coverage"
definition of
191-192
cousteUation pattern
192-193
Strength dispersion
reliability and
776
Stress (See also Strain)
bending stress
478
cylinder buckling stress
480
hoop stress
480-481
meridional stress
480
methods for analyzing
467-485

modulus of elasticity
proportional limit
reduction factor
stiffness
units and conversion factors
yield stress
Young's modulus
Stressed enviroument testing
Stroctnral design of a spacecraft

472
472
480

471
823
472
472
780

(See also Structures and Mechtmisms
subsystem)
459-485
fracture control policy
469
philosophy and criteria
467-469
safe-life analysis
469
safety factors
467-468
Structnre mass fradion
(lannch systems)
723
Slructnres and MedumJsms
304,335-336,459-497
snbsystem
cost estiJiJates
795-797
design of
335-336
design options
463-467

design process
459
margin of safety (MS)
489
463-467
materia1s
monocoque
sizing example
486490
packaging and configuring
462-463
power consumption
316
304,335,459
primary structure
representative masses of
895-896
459-462
requirements
by mission phase
460
launch vehicle, impact on
461
materials selection
463-467
304,335,459
secondary structure
semi-monocoque structure
335
470-497
size and mass estiJiJalion
skin-sttinger example
490-494
413
tensile strength ofmateria1s
weight budget
316
STRV (smaU satellite)
855
characteristics of
STS (Space Transportation System)
(See Space Shuttle)
Subject, of a space
10-12, 39, 251-255
mission
controllable (active)
253
10
defmition of
253-254
passive
250-251
signature
251-255
1rades
Subsatellite point (SSP) (See
112, 165, 167
also Ground track)
Subsystems (See also individual subsystems)
353-518
design of
519
hardware nomenclature
303
nomenclature for
895-896
repiesentative masses of
135
Sufficiently Inertia1 coordinate frame

971
Snn (See also Solar radiation; Solar cycles)
orbit perturbations due to
142-144
physical properties
897
431-432
thermal energy from
Snn incidence angle (See also
Solar arrays)
107-109
eclipse computations
geometry relative to spacecraft
107-109
322, 373
Snnsensors
375-377
FireSat example
665
software sizing
180,184
Snn-synclJronous orbits
144
determining inclination
Inside rear pages
tables of values
(col. 48)
180
uses for
Snnspot cycie (See Solar cycles)
Superblrd (spacecraft)
514
antenna size
Supervised autonomy
511
Supply chain management
759
in satellite manufacturing
213
Surface charging
Surface finishes
434-436
for tbermal control
Surface tension
use in propeUant
710
management
Surge-rate capacity (for launch
vehicles)
726
Surrey Space Technology
Laboratory (SSTLj See also UoSAT)
886-887
spacecraft computers
Survivability
221-238
221
requirements for
116
Swath
coverage
116
168,191
width
293
FrreSat example
128
width vs. elevation angIe
SymphoJJie (comonm.\cations
633
satellite)
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR)
167-168
access area
265
resolution
275
typical instruments
57-58
System algorithms
System block diagram
655
computer system
System Deslgn Review (SDR)
664
4,48.53
System drivers
identifying
37-38
37
"hidden drivers"
47,73
System engineering process
1,19,47-48
boob on
over mission lifecycle
881-888
74
"top-down"
System-generated electromagnetic
224,234
pulse (SGEMP)
System management software
661

972

Index

System noise temperature (See also

Temlsat (smail satellite)

Noise temperature)
System requirements (See Requirements
ofa space mission)
System Requjrements Review

554

-TTal-yuan launch complex
location of
Tanegasblrna launch site (Japan)

733

location of
Tanks, propellant

733

FLTSATCOM, HEAO examples
table of options for
weight estimation

346
709
714

Tantalum

use for shielding
Target machine (computer)
Targeting

in orbit control
Tasking, scheduling, and control
Taurus launch system
characteristics of

TCP (TransmissIon Control
Protocol)

231
672

508
28-31
731
728
632, 641

TCS (ThermaI Control Subsystem;

SeiThermal subsystem)
TDMA (TIme dh:lsion mulIiple access)
576
TDRS (See Tracking and Data Relay
SateUite)
Technology heritage (cost factor)
798-799
Technology readiness level (TRL)
804
Techsat-l (smail satellite)

characteristics of
855
Teledeslc (communications constellation)
example of "Big LEO"
539
FCC proposal
581

parameters of
Telemetry (See also Data rates;

584

Data delivery; Communications subsystem)
ana10g data
397
definition of
396
digital data
398
software sizing fat processing
665
Telemetry. tracking, and command
(TT&C) subsystem (See

Communication subsystem)
Telephone
data rate for
Television
data rate for
Telstar (early communications
satellites)

characteristics of

855

Temperature

(SRR)
650, 664, 675
System spedfication
92
System standards (See Standards)
76
System trades
21,53-57

546
546
633,856

973

Index
'fhenDal-vacnum test of
components
temperature cycle

units and conversion factors
924
Temperature range. launch environment 737
Temporal redundancy
779

ThermfoDic energy conversion

Tesserai terms (geopotentiai)
Test Readiness Review (TRR)
Testing

ThermOeledrlc oonple
(See also Power subsystem)
Thermosphere

143
664

in multi-spacecraft production
in single-spacecraft
mannfacturing
need to minimize
reliability
TFU (See Theoretical First Unit)
Thematic mapper Instrument
Then-year dollars
in cost modeling
Theoretical First Unit (TFU)

CERsfor
cost allocation to
definition of
'FireSat example
smallsats

748-749
524-530
755
779-781
275
791

796

798
786
811-812, 814
797

Thermal conductivity

units and conversion factors
Thermal control subsystem

924

ThermOStats

409
409
409
208
438-439
441-442
442

use on spacecraft
reliability of
Three-axis stabilization
advantages and disadvantages
320-322
angular impulse computation
323-327
classes of
318
configuration examples
310--311
control algorithms
379
failure rates for
769
hardware for
368
onFireSat
340
on FLTSATCOM, HEAO-B
343-347
874
on smaIl spacecraft
sensing needed
375
tecbniques for
361-365
313,408,416
use with solar arrays
Throughput. compnter

(See Thermal subsystem)
Thermal detector (See Detectors)
Thermal geomeiry factors
Thermal radiation
effect on thermal surface

. (See also Power subsystem)
ThermOdynamic: power cycle

in an elliptical orbit
525
527

estimating needs
907-912
435-436

formula S\IIIlDIIII}'
256
geometry factors for
907-908
properties of materials
437
spacecraft environment
428-429
spectral distribution
255-257
Thermal radiators (See Radiators)
Thermal subsystem
304, 303-332, 453-4$8
active vs. passive
428
cbaIlenges
450-452
components
434-446
cost estimates
795-797
design process for
429--431, 446-450
gradient requirement
428
hardware for
434-446
heat ba1ance equation
452-457
math models for
447-450
operational vs. survival limits
428,
457-458

power consumption
316,457-458
representative masses
895-896
requirements f1ow-down
448
428-431, 446-448
requirements for
software sizing
663-665
thermal challenges
430,450-452
thermal environment
431-434
weight. power, and telemetry
430,457-458
requirements
weight budget for
316

Thrust
Thrust coeft1clent

662-667
688
691

Thrust range
Thrust-to-weight ratio

692

of launch systems

722
710
712

Thrust vector control

table of methods
Thrusters (See also Attitude control

actuators; Propulsion subsystems)
control software sizing
design of
FueSat Example Mission
sizing
table of

693
665
715

372
372
711

Thnmba Equatorial Station

(launch site)

location of

733

Tidal forces

in microgravity

205

Thne

Julian Dates
time zones
units and conversion factors
Universal Time

913-918
914
924-925
913
TIme Average Gap (FIgure of Merit)
174
Thne division multiple access
(TDMA)
576
120
Thnelnview
Inside rear cover
table of values
(col. 9-12)
T1me-of-Oight
139-140,152

139-140
905

S\IIIlDIIII}' of formulas

TIme since perigee passage (See also

Mean anomaly; True anomaly;
Orbit elements)
TIme spreading or costs
method for
Thne systems
Thne word (in computer systems)
Thnezones

conversions

136
807
913-918
400
909

TlmeJine (See Mission timeline)
Thnetagglng
TIros (first weather satellite)
TItan launch system

634
856
731
characteristics of
728
cost estimates
802
741
fundamental frequency
742
injection accuracy
727
reliability experience
742
sound pressure level
409
Titan IV
743-744
user's gnide for
rOD (Trne or Dale coordinates)
97
Toe, of footprint (See also Footprint)
166
Topping cycle engine
696
Toroidal beam antenna
572
Torque (See also disturbance torque)
322-323
estimating requirements
units and conversion factors
920
Torquers (See Attitude control actuators;

Magnetic torquers; Control moment
gyros; Momentum wheels; Reaction
wheels; I1lTUSters)
730--731
TOS (Transfer Orbit Stage)
Tracking and Data Relay
Satellite (TDRS)

275, 498, 639-640

advantages and disadvantages
for navigation502
as communications relay element
43
313
axes of control
compatibility with
389
communications subsystem
310
configuration of
809
cost estimate
894-896
mass distribution of
548
parameters of
498
use for satellite navigation
389
Tracking range. communication
Trade studies (See System trades)
35-36
Trade tree
131
Trajectory (See also Orbits)
Training
521
manufacturing
595
on operations procedures
602,610
operations function
761
team building via
160
Transfer orbit
146--151
equations for
183-187
selecting

974

Index

Transfer Orbit Stage (TOS; Orbital
. transfervehicle)
characteristics of
730-731
Transmission Control
Protocol (TCP)
632, 641
Transmission path loss
551
Tnmsmit antenna gain
definition of
552
Tnmsmit RF equipment
625
Transmitters
solid-state
574-575
Transponder
block diagram
392
use for data relay
550
Transtage (rocket engine)
694
Transtar (rocket engine)
694
Trapped radIation (See also Van
Allen radiation belts)
214-217.224-226
Bremsstrahlung X-ray dosi:
216
rad (radiation absorbed dose;
unit of measure)
216
total radiation dose
216
TraveJlng-wave tube amplifier

Index

orbit maintenance
155-156
perturbations
142
Two-way coherent mode, communication 381
Type test
520
Tyuratam (BaIkonur lannch site)
location of
733

-uUDP (User Datagram ProtoCol)

UDage

632, 641
713

825

Ultbnate load
468
Ultraspectral sensor systeJns
276
Ultroviolet (UV)
266
UNAMSAT (small satellite)
characteristics of
855
Unit vectors
95.97.98
transformations to spherical
coordinates
101
United Nations Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space
837
Universal Tnne (UT)
626.913-914
conversion to civil time
913-914
use on spacecraft
400
Universal Tnne CoordInated (UTC)
626

Anti-Ballistic Missile Limitations
Treaty
827
Moon Treaty of 1979
825
Outer Space Treaty of 1967
provisions of
82H25
Treaty Bauning Nuclear
Weapon Tests in Outer Space
an
TRL (Tedmology Readiness Level)
804
Tropleal year
898
TRR (Test Readiness Review)
664
True anomaly (See also
Orbit elements)
133. 136-137
formulas for
905
approximation for
140
True of date coordInate
97

Unmanned Space Vehicle Cost Model (USCM)
CERs based on
795-796
FireSat example
811-814
publicly available
788. 796
UoSat
characteristics of
854
cost estimate
874
guidauce and control
864
use of GaAs solar cells
864
UpUnk
303
UPM-SAT (small satellite)
characteristics of
855
Uranns
thermal environment
434
USCM (See Unmanned Space Vehicle

(TWTM
Treaties
Antarctic Treaty
differences. from Outer
Space Treaty

n2

TRW
orbit patent
828
Tsiolokovsky, Konstantin
690
Tsyklon lannch system
cost of
802
reliability experience
727
TI&C (See Telemetry, Tracking. and
Co11l11lJJ1id)
TUBSAT (small satellite)
characteristics of
854-855
Tungsten
use for shielding
n1
Tnrnaround ratio, communication
381
"Turnkey" space system
832
Two-body equations or motion
(See also Orbits)
132-135

Cost Model)
User Datagram Protocol (UDP)
Users Mannals (launch systeJns)

632, 641
743-744

USSR (See Russia)

UT (See Universal Time)
UTC (Universal Thne CoordInated)
626
Utilities (saftwmre)
~7
Utility analysis (See also
Mission utility analysis)
49.59--69.70
UV (Ultraviolet)
266

-vVaHdation exercIses, for requirements
Valves

90
698

Van Allen radiation belts (See also
187.214-217
Trapped radiation)
effect of nuclear explosions on
224
factor in
181
hardening agaiost
221,224-226. nl
Vandenberg AF Base (See Western Range)
Varlable-conductance heat pipes
444-446
Variability Reduetlon (screening)
775-776
VELA (nnclear deteetlon satellite)
configuralion of
389.856
Velocity (See also Orbits: circular

velocity and escape velocity)
orbital
134-135
905
formulas for
table of values
Inside rear cover
(col. 41-48)
units and conversion factors
920
Velocity change (See Delta V)
Venus
434
thermal environment
Verification
94
96
Vernal equinox
precession of the equinoxes
96
use of
in celestial coordinates
96-97
in orbit elements
135
in sidereal time
154
VIbration
effect on microgravity
206
VIbration, launch
740
VIbration tests
525-526.529
ViewIng geometry
114-116
Earth from spacecraft
VIscosity
units and conversion factors
920
VIsIble systems (See Observation payloads) 2~
Visual deteetors
255-266
254
Visual payload design process
Vita (coJJllDllllications constellation)
example of Little LEO
539
use of store and forward
537
Vlta-bl decodlng,.with
convolutional coding
561-562
Volmne
units and conversion factors
824
Voyager (spacecraft)
analyzing payload data
562

-wWalker constellations
Walker delta pattern
Walker, John
Wallops Island facility
location of
WARC (World AdminIstrative
RadIo· Conference)
Watchdog timer .

194-197
194
194

732
733
387.566.826
401

975
Wavelength
255
WBS (See Work Breakdown Structure)
Weight budget
12, 315-317. 725
boosted weight
316
definition
12.314
FireSat example
341
FLTSATCOM. HEAO examples
345
for representative spacecraft
894-896
injected weight
316
loaded weight
316
spacecraft dry weight
316
315-317
Weight margin
Weightlessness (See Microgravity)
Westar (communications satellite)
633
rescue by Shuttle mission 51C
822
Western Range
732
available launch azimuth
734
available orbit inclination
734
733
location of
Whetsane computer beneIunark
~3
WhIskbroom scanner imaging mode 268-270
White Sands ground stutlon
489
Wldeband data systems
bandwidth of
550
definition of
535
examples of
584-585
WIck
in heat pipes
444-446
Wlen's Displacement Law
257
''Williams patent"
828
Wobble (See also Spin stabilization)
361
Woomera Launch Site
location of
733
Word processing, as illustration of
656
saftwmre architecture
Words, computer memory (See also
Computer systems. spacecraft)
606
Work Breakdown Structure (WBS)
definition of
784
811-812
forFireSat
representative WBS
786
781
Workmanship failures
World Admlnlstrative RadIo
Conference (WARC)
387.566.826

-xX-33 (reusable launch vehicle)
regulatory constraints
X-34 (reusable Iannch vehicle)
regulatory constraints
X-band communications
characteristics of
onDSCS III
on small satellites
X-ray spectrometer
X-ray telescope (See Chandra)
X-rays

822
822
386.393.641
394

550
865
275
255

Inde;t

976
from nuclear explosion
from solar particle events
production ofEMPfrom

222-223
217-218
224

sbielding against

230-231

Xicbang launch complex
XLR-132 (rocket engine)

733
694

-yYaw (orbit defined coordinate)
Yaw steering, spacecraft
Yield factor

Yield load
Yield margin
Yield (Nuclear explosion)
Young's modulus

96-97,355
313
468
468
468
222
472

913-914
728
727

Zenith
99
Zenith angle
102
Zero-g (See Microgravity)
Zero momentum system (See also Attitude
determination and control
subsystem)
359, 362
Zonal coefficients (spherical

harmonics)
Zulu TIme (Z = GMT = UT)

The following table provides a variety ofquantitative data for Earth-orbiting satellites_ Limitations, fonnuIas, and text references are given below. The independent
parameter in the fonnulas is the distance, r, from the center of the Earth in kID. The left
most column on each table page is the altitude, h == r - RE, where RE 6,378.14 km
is the equatorial radius of the Earth.
1. Instantaneous Area Access for a 0 deg Elevation Angle or the Full Geometric
Horizon (106km2). All the area that an instrument or antenna could potentially
see at any instant if it were scanned through its nonnal range of orientations
for which the spacecraft elevation is above 0 deg [Eq. (7-6)].
2. Instantaneous Area Access for a 5 deg Minimum Elevation Angle (106 km2)
same as col. 1 but with elevation of 5 deg.
3. Instantaneous Area Access for a 10 deg Minimum Elevation Angle (106 km2)
same as col. 1 but with elevation of 10 deg.
.
4. Instantaneous Area Access for a 20 deg Minimum Elevation Angle (106 km2)
= same as col. 1 but with elevation of 20 deg.
5. Area Access Rate for an Elevation of 0 deg (103 km2/s) the rate at which
new land is coming into the spacecraft's access area [Eq. (7-10)].
6. Area Access Rate for an Elevation Limit of 5 deg (1 Q3 km2/s) same as col. 5
with an elevation of 5 deg.
7. Area Access Ratefor an Elevation Limit of 10-deg (103 km2/s) same as col.
5 with an elevation of 10 deg.
8. Area Access Rate for an Elevation Limit of20 deg (103 km2/s) same as col.
5 with an elevation of 20 deg.
9. Maximum TIme in View for a Satellite Visible to a Minimum Elevation Angle
of 0 deg (min) PAmaxl180 deg, where P is from col. 52 and Amax is from
col. 13. Assumes a circular orbit over a nonrotating Earth [Eq. (5-49)].
10. Maximum TIme in View for a Satellite VlSible to a Minimum Elevation Angle
of5 deg (min) same as col. 9 with Amax for 5 deg taken from col. 14.
11. Maximum TIme in View for a Satellite Visible to a Minimum Elevation Angle
of 10 deg (min) = same as col. 9 with Amax for 10 deg taken from col. 15.
12. Maximum TIme in View for a Satellite VlSible to a Minimum Elevation Angle
of20 deg (min) = same as col. 9 with Amax for 20 deg taken from col. 16.
13. Earth Central Angle for a Satellite at 0 deg Elevation (deg) = Maximum Earth
Central Angle = acos(RE / r). Alternatively, Maximum Earth Central Angle is
= 90- p, where p is from col. 49 [Eqs. (5-16), (5-17)].
14. Earth Central Anglefor a Satellite at 5 deg Elevation (deg) 9O-1H1, where
TJ asin (COSE sinp), pis from col. 49, and E= 5 deg [Eqs. (5-26), (5-27)].
15; Earth Central Angle for a Satellite at 10 deg Elevation (deg) same as col. 14
but with E 10 deg.

=

=

-Z-Z (Zulu TIme = GMT = UT)
Zeult launch system
characteristics of
reliability experience

Explanation of Earth Satellite Parameters

143
913-914

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

Explanation of Earth Satellite Parameters

Explanation of Earth SateDite Parameters

16. Earth Central Angle for a Satellite at 20 deg Elevation (deg) = same as col. 14
but with E =20 deg.

28. Maximum Atmospheric Density = same as col. 26 but with a FlO.7 value of
189.0 x 10-22 W-m-2o Hz-1. This is the FlO.7 value such that 10% of all measured values are above it.

17. Maximum Range to Horizon = Range to a satellite at 0 deg elevation (Ian) =
(r2 - RE 2)112, where RE =6,378.14 km is the equatorial radius of the Earth.

29. Minimum 6V to Maintain Altitude at Solar Minimum (mls per year) =
n(G>Alm) x prvlP, where p is from col..26, v is from col. 41, P is from col. 52
expressed in years, and the ballistic coefficient, mlCbA, is assumed to be 50
kglm2. 6 V estimates are not meaningful above 1,500 km [Eq. (6-26)].

18. Range to a Satellite at 5 deg Elevation (Ian) = Maximum Range for Satellites
with a Minimum Elevation Angle of5 deg (Ian) RE (siMI sin1]), where RE
6,378.14 km is the equatorial radius of the Earth, .A. is from col. 14, 11 90 deg
-.A. - E, and E 5 deg [Eq. (5-28)].

=

=

=

=

30. Maximum 6 V to Maintain Altitude at Solar Maximum (mls per year) = same
as col. 29 with P from col. 28; Ballistic coefficient mlCbA = 50 kglm2.

19. Range to a Satellite at 10 deg Elevation (Ian) = same as col. 18 with.A. from
col. 15 and E = 10 deg.
20. Range to a Satellite at 20 deg Elevation (Ian)
col. 16 and E 20 deg.

=

31. Minimum 6V to Maintain Altitude at Solar Minimum (mls per year) =same as
col. 29 with p from col. 26; Ballistic coefficient mlCbA = 200 kglm2.

=same as col. 18 with A. from

21. Maximum Nadir Angle for a Satellite at 0 deg Elevation Angle (deg) =Max.
Nadir Angle for Any Point on the Earth = Earth Angular Radius = asin (RE I r),
where RE =6,378.14 km is the equatorial radius of the Earth [Eq. (5-16)].
22. Nadir Angle for a Satellite at 5 deg Elevation Angle (deg) =Maximum Nadir
Angle for Points on the Ground with a Minimum Elevation Angle of 5 deg =
90 deg - E- A., is the Earth central angle from col. 14 [Eq. (5-27)].
23. Nadir Anglefor a Satellite at 10 deg Elevation Angle (deg) =same as col. 22
with E= 10 deg.
24. Nadir Angle for a Satellite at 20 deg Elevation Angle (deg)
with e = 20 deg.

=same as col. 22

25. Atmospheric Scale Height (km) = RT I Mg, where R is the molar gas constant.
T is the temperature, M is the mean molecular weight. and g is the gravitational acceleration [inside front cover].
26. Minimum Atmospheric Density (kglm3), from MSIS atmospheric moder
[Hedin"tt, 1987, 1988, and 1991]. The solar flux value, FlO.7, was chosen
such that 10% of all measured data are less than this minimum (65.8 x 10-22
W om-2.Hz-l). See Sec. 8.1.3. The MSIS model is limited to the region
between 90 and 2,000 kIn. Below 150 km and above 600 km the error
increases because less data have been used. All data have been averaged
across the Earth with a 30 deg step size in longitude and 20 deg steps in latitude (-80 deg, to +80 deg). This over-represents the Earth's polar regions;
however, satellites spend a larger fraction of their time at high latitudes. The
solar hour angle was adapted to the individual location on the Earth with UT =
12.00 Noon.
27. Mean Atmospheric Density (kglm3) = same as col. 26 but with a mean FlO.7
value of 118.7 x 10-22 W om-2oHz-l.
.. Hedin. Alan E. 1987. "MSIS-86 Thermospheric Model." J. Geophys. Res., 92, No. AS,
pp. 4649-4662.
t - - . 1988. "The Atmospheric Model In The Region 90 to 2,000 km." Adv. Space Res., 8,
No. ~, pp. (5)9-{5)25, Pergamon Press.
:j: - - . 1991: "Extension of the MSIS Thermosphere Model into the Middle and Lower
Abnosphere." J. Geophys. Res., 96, No.A2, pp.1159-1172.

.

32. Maximum 6 V to Maintain Altitude at Solar Maximum (mls per year) =same
as col. 29 with P from col. 28; Ballistic coefficient mlCbA = 200 kglm2.
33. Orbit Decay Rate at Solar Minimum (kmIyear) =-2n (q,Alm) p r21P, where
p is from col. 26, P is from col. 52 (expressed in years), and the ballistic coefficient. mlCbA, is assumed to be 50 kglm2. Orbit decay rates are not meaningful above 1,500 km [Eq. (6-24)].
34. Orbit Decay Rate at Solar Maximum (kmIyear) = same as col. 33, with P from
col. 28 and the ballistic coefficient, mlCbA, assumed to be 50 kglm2.

. 35. Orbit Decay Rate at Solar Minimum (kmIyear) = same as col. 33 with P from
col. 26, and the ballistic coefficient, mlCbA, assumed to be 200 kglm2.
36. Orbit Decay Rate at Solar Maximum (km/year) = same as col. 33, with P from
col. 28 and the ballistic coefficient, mlCbA, assumed to be 200 kglm2.
37. Estimated Orbit Lifetime at Solar Minimum (days) =Data was produced using
.
the software package SatLife. Ballistic coefficient, mlCbA, assumed to be 50
kglm2.
38. Estimated Orbit Lifetime at Solar Maximum (days) =same as col. 37 with the
ballistic coefficient. mlCbA, assumed to be 50 kglm2.
39. Estimated Orbit Lifetime at Solar Minimum (days) = same as col. 37 with the
ballistic coefficient, mlCbA, assumed to be 200 kglm2.
40. Estimated Orbit Lifetime at Solar Maximum (days) =same as col. 37 with the
ballistic coefficient. mlCbA, assumed to be 200 kglm2.
41. Circular Velocity (kmIs) =(p.Elr) 112 = 631.3481r -112 [Eq. (6-5)].
42. Orbit Angular Velocity (deglminute) = 360IP = 2.170415 x 106r-312 , where P
is from col. 52. This is the angular velocity with respect to the center of the
Earth for a circular orbit. (See col. 47 for angular rate with respect to ground
stations) [Eq. (5-31)] .
43. Escape Velocity (kmIs) = (2p/r)112 = 892.8611r-l12 =(2)112 X vcirc [Eq. (6-6)].
44. 6V Required to De-Orbit (mls) =the velocity change needed to transform the
assumed circular orbit to an elliptical orbit with an unchanged apogee and a
perigee of 50 km [Eq. (6-32) and Sec. 6.3.1]. (Note that this a correction to the
corresponding columns in SMAD I and SMAD II which were incorrect.)

Exp~tion of Earth Satellite Parameters

45. Plane Change AV «mlsydeg) =2,000 veire sin (0.5 deg), where veire is from
col. 41. Assumes circular orbit and linear sine function; [Eq. (6-38»)
46. AV Required/or a i kmAltitude Change (mls) =assumes a Hohmann Transfer
with rB - rA =1 km; [Eq. (6-32»).
47. Maximum Angular Rate As Seen from a Ground Station (degls) = 2nrlhP.
where h 5: r - RE is the altitude and P is from col. 52. This is the angular rate
as seen from the surface of a non-rotating Earth of a satellite in a circular orbit
passing directly overhead. (See col. 42 for the angular velocity as seen from
the center of the Earth.) [Eq. (5-47»).
48. Sun Synchronous inclination (deg) = acos (-4.773 48 x 10-15 r 712); assumes
circular orbit with node rotation rate of 0.9856 deglday to follow the mean
motion of the Sun. Above 6,000 km altitude there are no Sun synchronous
circular orbits [Eq. (6-19»).
49. Angular Radius o/the Earth (deg) = asin (REI r), where RE = 6,378.14 km is
the.equatorial radius of the Earth [Eqs. (5-16)].
50. One Degree Field 0/ View Mapped onto the Earth's Surface at Nadir from
Altitude h (km) = The length on the Earth's curved surface of a 1 deg arc
projected at nadir from this altitude. Note: This data is very nonlinear
[Eqs. (5-26a), (5-26b), and (5-27)].
51. Range to Horizon (km) = same as col. 17 = (r2 - RE 2)112, where RE =
6,378.14 km is the equatorial radius of the Earth. For the range to points other
than the true horizon (i.e., E*-O deg) use columns 18, 19, and 20 [Eq. (5-28)].
52. Period (min) = 1.658669 x 104 r312 = (1/60) x 2n (r3/Ji)II2. Assumes a circular orbit, r is measured in kID, and Ji =398,600.5 km3/s2• Note that period is
the same for an eccentric orbit with semimajor axis =r; [Eq. (7-7)].
53. Maximum Eclipse (minutes) = (p!180 deg)p' where p is from col. 49 and P is
from col. 52. This is the maximum eclipse for a circular orbit. Eclipses at this
altitude in an eccentric orbit can be longer. [See Example 1, Sec. 5.1]
54. Revolutions per Day (#) =1,436.07/p, where P is from col. 52. Note that this
is revolutions per sidereal day, where the sidereal day is the day relative to the
fixed stars which is approximately 4 min shorter than the solar day of 1,440
min. [Note: This is a correction to SMAD I and II (printings 1 through 4)
where the revolutions per day were defined as here but the data was produced
using 1,440 min as the length of a day.]
55. Node Spacing (deg) = 360 deg x (P /1,436.07), where P is from col. 52. This
is the spacing in longitude between successive ascending or descending nodes
for a satellite in a circular orbit [Eq. (7-13)]. Does not take into account node
precession rate from col. 56.
56. Node Precession Rate (deglday) =-2.06474 x 1014 r -712 cos i =-1.5 n J2
<RE/a)2 (cos i) (1 - e2)-2, where i is the inclination, e the eccentricity (which
is set to zero), n is the mean motion (= (p/a3)112). a the semimajor axis, and J2
the dominant zonal coefficient in the expansion of the Legendre polynomial
describing the geopotential. This is the angle through which the orbit rotates
in inertial space in a 24 hour period. Assumes a circular orbit; r is in km in the
first expression [Eq. (6-19)].

Earth Satellite Parameters

Earth Satellite Parameters

Earth Satellite Parameters

62.91
66.22

81.30

56.87

71.16
~ 73.32··.

66.32

56.96

66As

;66.99;.:

74.94

70.06

.·EiO~·

76.17
76.33

11.2'7

6/67
61.83

71.43

--------------

Earth Satellite Parameters

Earth Satellite Parameters

33

35,000
35,786

See Front

--------

36

39

40

Earth Satellite Parameters
Earth Satellite Parameters

49

50

51

52

53

54

55

56

